The purpose of this study was to examine within- and across-language relationships between lexical
and grammatical domains by focusing on measures of lexical diversity and grammatical complexity
in Spanish and English. One hundred ninety-six preschool and school-aged Latino children with
different levels of English and Spanish proficiencies and different language abilities produced narratives
in Spanish, English, or both. Analyses revealed strong associations between lexical (number of
different words and number of different verbs) and grammatical measures (mean length of utterances in
words and use of ditransitive predicates), supporting the domain interdependence hypothesis within a
language. Cross-linguistic comparisons indicate a greater diversity of verbs and ditransitive predicates
in Spanish compared to English for this population. In the language samples of children who produced
narratives in the two languages, there was no relationship between the two domains across languages.
The lack of cross-language correlations may be related to other variables influencing lexical and
semantic development in bilingual learners. Methodological issues to be considered in future studies
with bilingual speakers are discussed.

An alternative approach to examine cross-language relationships for oral language
measures in older children is to assess their spontaneous language samples. One
advantage is that this methodology does not rely on tests developed for monolingual
speakers as is the case with current standardized measures. In addition, to
study bilingual children in the two languages, it is important to use measures that
are comparable across the languages. Narratives can helpmeasure lexical diversity
and grammatical complexity in both languages. During narration, children need
to use sentences of different length and complexity as well as an appropriate and
relevant lexicon. Then, these utterances can be analyzed to obtain estimates of
lexical and grammatical complexity in every language. Narratives allow us to
study cross-linguistic differences across the languages of monolingual speakers.

The bestmethodology to study lexical diversity in Spanish is not established yet.
In contrast to English, Spanish is highly inflected for verbs, articles, and adjectives,
and thus rules for counting word roots differ from one language to the other.

In two picture-naming experiments we investigated the nature of such form facilitation effect
with Mandarin Chinese, separating the effects of phonology and orthography. Significant facilitation
effects were observed both when distractors were only orthographically or only phonologically related
to the targets. The orthographic effect was overall stronger than the phonological effect. These findings
suggest that the classic form facilitation effect in picture–word interference is a mixed effect with
multiple loci: it cannot be attributed merely to the nonlexical activation of the target phonological
segments from the visual input of the distractor. It seems instead that orthographically only related
distractors facilitate the lexical selection process of picture naming, and phonologically only related
distractors facilitate the retrieval of target phonological segments.

Laboratory-based experiments examining the process of spoken word recognition
have shown in a variety of tasks that English words with a sparse neighborhood
are responded to more quickly and more accurately than words with a dense neighborhood.

These results
suggest that during spoken word recognition multiple word-forms are activated and
compete with each other.

Evidence for the activation of and competition among multiple word-forms
during spoken word recognition also comes from an analysis of a corpus of speech
perception errors known as slips of the ear.

This more ecologically valid examination of the process of
spoken word recognition further demonstrates that multiple, similar word-forms are
activated and compete during spoken word recognition, and that words that activate
many similar sounding words are more likely to be misperceived than words that
activate few similar sounding words.

It is important to note, however, that much of the empirical work—including
studies of human behavior and computer simulations—examining the process of
lexical activation has used monosyllabic words as stimuli.

It is important to note, however, that this work examined the recognition
of bisyllabic Spanish words by native speakers of Spanish, not the recognition
of bisyllabic English words by native speakers of English. Although the results of
Vitevitch and Rodríguez suggest that multiple word-forms can facilitate the recognition
of spoken words, it is unclear if the facilitative rather than competitive influence
of neighborhood density on spoken word recognition could be better accounted for
by a cross-linguistic difference in spoken word recognition processes—like that seen
in the process of segmenting a spoken word from fluent speech—or if the result reported in
Vitevitch and Rodríguez was due to a different processing dynamic being employed
for the recognition of longer versus shorter spoken words.

They hypothesized that longer words would have greater lexical activation than
shorter words, leading to a larger lexical shift in the trisyllabic words than in the monosyllabic
words.

They also found that duration manipulations and
task demands modulated the effect, most notably for the monosyllabic words. Pitt
and Samuel concluded that a better understanding of lexical processing could only
be obtained by examining words of various lengths, not just monosyllabic words as
previous studies have used.

Unfortunately, the relationship between uniqueness
point and the number of competitors is not so straightforward.

Because uniqueness point and
the number of competitors are not linearly related, it is difficult to use uniqueness
point as a consistent measure of number of competitors.

Given the difficulty in interpreting the results of Pitt and Samuel, the
influence of word length on lexical processing is still unclear.