Considerable effort in translation studies is devoted to understanding the role of globalization in the recuperation of postcolonial cultures. Sandra Bermann writes in her introduction to a recent collection of essays on translation: “Waves of migrating people have made the contemporary nation-state, and especially its urban centers, into global sites with multiplicities of languages and cultures. At the same time, the international trade, finance, and information technology that support these sites both depend upon and often seek to bypass translation for economic growth with world and regional markets.”

Unlike those involved in cultural and literary study, economic globalizers want to adopt “‘the invisible theory of translation,’ the assumption that languages are neutral media for separable ‘content.’” Because of the simultaneous necessity of translation and the desire to render it invisible, it has become common among literary translation critics to recognize how translation now performs what looks like two contradictory functions: it represents new readings (new interpretations), while, at the same time, it brings a known text (the “text itself”) to new language groups. It looks as if globalization renders the study of language and literature necessarily pluralistic and multiplies the dimensions that texts and genres can have at one moment.

Both globalization and translation have been key factors in the history of the Western university: scholars have always been involved in the mixing of societies, the sharing of languages and literatures, and the teaching of their findings and understandings. Those, such as Renaissance humanists, who were involved in these ecumenical efforts, have achieved a great deal that has enriched cultures for centuries. Yet these achievements have remained marginal relative to the roles of the university as a social institution. In spite of the historical awareness of both the processes of international cultural sharing, and the patient, and perhaps even heroic, efforts at translation when new texts have been discovered or have otherwise come into play, such scholarship has been reduced in its influence and significance by the supervening priorities of university sponsors. Church, state, and now corporations have shied away from, and in many cases actively suppressed, real interchange of language and culture; they have preferred the rule of single languages or, at best, a hierarchical arrangement of languages, in which there is one official or standard language, while other languages are tolerated to a limited extent. For the most part, this policy of the hierarchical arrangement and study of language and literature has been accepted by the majority of university faculty members throughout the history of the university. It is not clear that today’s academic initiatives will get a better response than the initiatives of such figures as John Wyclif in the fourteenth century, Lorenzo Valla in the fifteenth century, Sebastian Castellio in the sixteenth century, Christian Thomasius in the seventeenth, or many medieval “heretics” who advocated for vernacular translations of the sacred texts.

If academics involved in literary globalization hold democratic and egalitarian ideals about the sharing of languages and literatures, the university as an institution has not recognized them in the past and does not seem to now. In general, intercultural mixing in university contexts, both socially and through language exchange, has not had the freedom to develop on its own. More often than not, academic pluralism has been constrained by their sources of support from the church, from monarchs, and now, from corporate interests. Under these circumstances, it would not be true to say that translation performs two different functions of equal consequence. Rather, the overwhelming economic identity of “globalization” values one of the translation functions over the other: the promotion of language transparency and/or the hegemony of a single language. This economic identity of globalization does not urge the formation of grounds for language interaction or exchange. English is promoted by social and economic elites as the standard, and other languages are to be translated toward English not the other way around. Anthropologist Jonathan Friedman, studying language change in Hawaii, observed that language minorities “at the bottom” “serve the cultural elites”: “The divided bottom is the source of cultural enrichment for the globalized elites, it is the zone of production of cultural differences in a world of mass migration and diasporization. But it is also a world in which identities related to the bottom are opposed to those at the top; they are potentially dangerous in their local xenophobia. If the top is moving beyond the state into the global cosmos, the bottom remains ‘imprisoned,’ as globalizers would have it in its local enclaves.”

Although there is a real energy among us (contemporary academics) to study other cultures and languages, our membership in the economic elite at every moment can deauthorize, negate, or segregate efforts at cultural pluralism. For this reason, Hester Eisenstein refers to globalization as “the deadly process of capitalist globalization.”

Recently Tamar Lewin wrote a two-part essay in the New York Times telling how several American universities are rushing “to set up outposts abroad.”

When academic interest in literary globalization is viewed in the context of the history of the Western university, the picture given by Friedman from an anthropological standpoint applies, though different groups within the male membership of the university cultural elites were usually at odds with one another. During this eight-century history of the Western university, issues of multinational diversity and rivalry arose repeatedly, accompanied by a constant battle about matters of translation, including disputes about whether texts should be translated at all. It is rarely acknowledged that university sponsors—the ruling powers of church and state—depend on a radical limiting of access of the general population to languages in which laws and other formal documents are written. Universities and their membership collaborated with this limiting of access, in spite of the fact that this membership also took pleasure in the discovery of old texts and in adapting them to immediate interests. Those accused of heresy were usually those who advocated increased popular uses of and access to the vernacular and who translated the sacred texts into the vernaculars. It is noteworthy that the issues, such as how languages interact with one another, that are now being discussed by translation scholars had been deliberately suppressed in the past by the practice of asserting that only one language is both sacred and true.

In the following essay, I will read certain poems by Sylvia Plath to demonstrate a way of reading that derives from the ethics of Emmanuel Levinas. According to Levinas, ethics requires one to face others in such a way that the incommensurable weight of the other's lived existence is primary: the affective dimension of the other is primary to discernible contours or articulable characteristics of the other. This basic move--to apprehension prior to comprehension of the other--provides a new basis for philosophy, Levinas says, as ethics becomes first philosophy, prior even to ontology. To put Levinas's move in the language of literary criticism and rhetoric, pathos (apprehension of feeling) comes prior to ethos (judgment of character) in a reader's or audience's apprehension of alterity. With this connection, I imply an aesthetic aspect to Levinas's ethics, while at the same time I suggest that the way of reading I will demonstrate has an ethical dimension. But I do not claim that my reading involves an approach to the good. Indeed, insofar as it involves ethics, my essay deals with the difficulty of being ethical.

Considering Levinas's focus on the affect of the other as an aesthetic move provides a way of handling a key problem that various critics have found in his work: a genuine move to the affective ruptures any determination of the move as ethical. To say this involves recognizing ethics as philosophical discourse, metaphysically centered on the objective of what is defined to be good. Levinas is correct in showing that the affect of the other must be the primary emphasis of ethics, for without it ethics remains an abstract totality; it follows that his emphasis on affect deconstructs ethics. But in retaining the word "ethics," Levinas obscures the deconstruction. Focusing on a desire to approach the other's affect, he focuses on desire that in philosophical terms would have been called ethical, but a desire that by its own application--by exceeding the metaphysics of the good--invalidates the name of ethics.

My emphasis on affect can work within aesthetics in a way that Levinas's emphasis cannot work in ethics, because aesthetics may be decentered as ethics cannot be. By reading in such a way that the affective dimensions of texts disrupt the intellectual activity of judgment in aesthetics, I develop an untotalized, denatured aesthetics. One may argue that like ethics, aesthetics must be centered and develop a sense of the good; the argument would be long, and I will simply indicate that I follow Georges Bataille and others who claim an untotalized aesthetics. As my readings emphasize a desire to face the affect of the other, they emphasize that desire which Levinas shows to be mandatory for ethics but which disrupts ethics as such. The desire I emphasize lacks naturalization and totalization, falling outside anthropology as well as philosophy, driving an aesthetics of the feeling of the other which--following literary and rhetorical traditions, albeit loosely--I call the aesthetics of pathos.2 Levinas writes of the "restlessness" of consciousness that is open to the other, thus capturing the insecurity of moving outside philosophy; this restlessness should extend into the instability of determining a name for the act of encountering the other.

The emphasis on an untotalizing approach to the other's affect, for Levinas, includes focusing on the singularity of the encounter with the other. Reading provides an appropriate occasion for exploring such an encounter, and what follows in this essay--although it will iterate theoretical concerns of the introduction--is not a philosophical treatise, but a performative work of criticism. The first-person voice of the essay (even in its plural manifestations) is a phenomenon of subjectivity, not a voice of definitive truth. Similarly, the reading does not definitively impute characteristics to Sylvia Plath or to an oeuvre, style, or technique that is attributable to her (although my references to other critics are suggestive in this respect, beginning to knit a fabric of literary-critical conversation).3 Although the following readings say more about aesthetics than ethics, they say more about Levinas's work than Plath's, more about reading than either, and more about a specific encounter with particular texts than about reading in general or about a particular type of discourse (the essay focuses mainly on poems, but neither exclusively nor necessarily). With the deconstruction of ethics and philosophical aesthetics foregone, my reading primarily develops a singular exposition of desire and judgment in dialogue, amid an aesthetics whose desired focus is affective alterity.

When I confront affective material in "Apprehensions," I do not find myself engaging with a persona who contains emotions or whose feelings I can accurately articulate in terms of the persona's situation, thoughts, or actions (although it is possible to make conjectures about such matters). Although I am little tempted to construe details as integrated moments of a psychology, I find palpable the feelings per se. Feelings appear as substantial moments, which as such do not automatically integrate into personality or subjectivity. I do attribute feeling to a voice, which is how I mark the feeling's otherness: the notion of the voice mediates my apprehension of feeling, raising a disjunction that marks what is not my own feeling. Yet the voice's otherness does not in itself bring a person present, seeming rather to dwell prior to any notion of a consistent humanity. I do not obtain a sense of naturalized humanity when confronted in such a way by the affective dimensions of a voice, while I may recognize something undeniably living and compelling in the voice's feelings, particularly in the suffering to which the voice seems subject. Through the recognition of its suffering, a voice's feeling can register for a reader as affective substance.

What mainly attracts me to Plath's voices is their pathos; what makes her voices compelling is their apprehensible capacity for suffering. This would appear to be an ethical compulsion, involving attention that is commonly considered an essential component of ethics. This point can help explain a reader's attraction to the voice of Plath's "Morning Song," the voice of a disaffected mother for whom her newborn is "like a fat gold watch," opaque and inhuman. This is a mother for whom the baby's mouth, "clean as a cat's," in the unfolding of the imagery opens and transforms into the "window square" that "Whitens and swallows its dull stars": the baby's organ of nourishment and expression turns, for the mother, into an empty, unsympathetic eternity, revealing the blankness of one of an endless series of mornings (156-57). There is pathos in the mother's voice that evokes solicitude, however counter this pathos may be to an ethos of motherhood that might be normalized as productive and healthy.5 Yet the feeling in the voice is largely opaque, too much so for me to say I can share it. What predominates is the inescapability of the voice's suffering.

I focus here on the moment of affect's compulsion, on an aesthetic moment in which affect may be for a reader a substantiality that is excessive of subjectivity, character, ethos, or any similar idea that entails human consistency or integrity. In the vagueness of what we perceive to be an imagistic moment that yet feels substantial--in the incomprehensibility of something tangible--we may recognize an unmanageable excess that convinces us that another's feeling is real. As Levinas details in the first section of Totality and Infinity, we apprehend moments of affect before comprehension. Levinas's thought engages us to dwell on the affect as such: as the affect stands out, not drawn into determinate relations that reduce it. Thus, we may apprehend what Levinas refers to as the "infinity" of feeling, which I see as an excess that disrupts the idea of the human as a natural totality. A glimpse of infinite affect in imagery may make that imagery our dwelling place with concrete feeling. Dwelling so with what we recognize as another life, we take the other's existence even prior to understanding what it is. Levinas thus brackets the trappings of subjectivity and intersubjective communication in a phenomenological reduction upon the affective existence of the other. By this approach to feeling, there can be no knowing an other without dwelling with the other on the terms of the other's unreduced affect; anything like knowing remains something beyond epistemology, something more tactile.

On a neuro-physiological level, the study of emotion has been relatively excluded from studies of cognition in part simply because the emotional and sensory centers in the brain are distinct, but increasingly cognitive science has recognized that these centers are linked, sharing and passing on information and creating responses in as yet not comprehended ways. For the most part though in the 1990s cognitive theory sought to contend with emotions in what we could describe as a neo-Kantian approach, ascribing them to the realm of judgment. Appraisal theory describes emotions as arising in a complex condition of evaluation or appraisal; we experience love because we appraise that we are being treated well.1 However, such a rational judgment model, subsuming emotions into a computational approach, cannot take into account dispositions or temperament that have nothing to do with rational judgments or choices. 

Thus a turn came in cognitive science with the investigation of affective elements and memory. It might seem like a simple matter of common sense, but the premise that strong emotional-affective experiences can color memories, for instance simply make them more vivid, offered a breakthrough in the consideration of how cognitive representations work. Michael Martinez described the state of research developing out of this insight: "representations are often portrayed as valueless, cool records of information and experience. This portrayal is misleading because represented knowledge very often does have emotional and motivational value; representations are words, images, goals, and plans charged with meaning, valence, emotion, and energy."

That this "affective turn" began in cognitive science roughly a decade ago and is only now gaining momentum might, from outside the discipline, seem a bit contrary to expectations but we might want to recall that, as psychologist Eleanor Rosch noted, "since the Greeks, Western psychology has treated affect and cognition as separate faculties, states, or processes, and through history cognition has been valued more positively than affect. Emotion tends to be seen as irrational and reason as affectless."4 As the Martinez quote indicates, seeing and perceiving, as fundamentals of cognition, were primarily approached from the camera obscura perspective, as if the image was written innocently on the grey matter of the brain. That perhaps experiences of affect, emotions, or desire could prove more primary, or if they have a fundamental evaluative function, or how they might color cognition with a particular valence is an open field of exploration.

here is a second turn of central interest to this essay and that is the turn to cognitive film studies. While cognitive scientists have carefully constructed experiments with visual materials to trace out how perception functions, they have not extensively considered different modes of viewing, different media of seeing.7 Cognitive film studies holds the potential to offer to cognitive scientists a wealth of information and an elaborated language developed over years to describe various aspects of image and viewing, frame and positionality, the embodiment of viewing as it interacts with the constructed viewing space and directed viewing material. Cognitive film studies is a new development, having emerged in the span of the last decade.8 While posing new productive questions, the attempt to develop an interdisciplinary relationship between cognitive science and film studies up until now has resulted mainly in a rather one-sided direction of application.

This approach does open up new understanding but it moves in a singular direction of applying cognitive/analytic work to film. The problem, and point of critical intervention here, is first that such an approach easily overlooks the fact that the work being adopted may itself exist within a series of disciplinary internal contestations and critiques. What is taken as fact by someone from outside, is often itself only a proposition under investigation within a discipline. Such is the case with cognitive theory and the approach to the image and emotions; it is, as noted above, the site of various and lively debates. Secondly and relatedly, such research does not move in the other direction, with inquiry into film and the cognitive processes it unleashes being perceived as making a contribution to existing debates in cognitive science. Film scholars are not producing investigations of interest to their colleagues in cognitive science. This is understandable, given the nature of the training of film scholars. The type of experimental procedures in cognitive science is not yet part of the background of most of the new cognitive film scholars, nor do cognitive scientists understand how to benefit from the non-clinical models of research in film studies. However, I contend that an awareness of the debates within cognitive approaches does allow for a type of research and investigation that establishes an inter-disciplinary conversation.

Mike Hoolboom has described Michael Brynntrup as "the most fiercely prolific filmmaker of the German fringe." Indeed Brynntrup has produced close to one hundred moving image pieces: films, videos, digital images, as well as a series of drawings and other art objects. Further he has kept an artist's diary and has constructed a web site that pushes his entire life into the realm of mediatized art. It is an impressive oeuvre that covers an expansive set of concerns. Moreover the work continually becomes more complicated, drawing on new technologies and new forms of signification. Brynntrup even reworks his older pieces, drawing old images into new settings and transforming the format itself, converting for example early super 8 films from the 1980s into interactive digital texts to be posted on his website. In terms of content, Hoolboom notes that Brynntrup "has undertaken an exhaustive cinematic self-examination, conjuring the subject as a fictional amalgam of semiotic slippage, male/male desire and broken historical recall."