The White House on Thursday signaled the outlines of its strategy for breaking the partisan logjam holding up President Obama’s agenda, saying Democrats would move quickly to underline their commitment to fixing the broken economy and to build an election-year case against Republicans if they do not cooperate.

With Mr. Obama’s health care overhaul stalled on Capitol Hill, Rahm Emanuel, the White House chief of staff, said in an interview that Democrats would try to act first on job creation, reducing the deficit and imposing tighter regulation on banks before returning to the health measure, the president’s top priority from last year.

But Mr. Obama quickly got a taste of how difficult it would be to bring the opposition party on board.

One day after the president upbraided Congress in his State of the Union address for excessive partisanship, Senate Republicans voted en masse against a plan to require that new spending not add to the deficit (it passed anyway as all 60 members of the Democratic caucus hung together). And some Republicans peremptorily dismissed Mr. Obama’s main job-creating proposal, expressing no interest in using $30 billion in bank bailout money for business tax credits.

“I think there is a right way and a wrong way to do it, and that is not the right way,” said Senator John Cornyn, the Texas Republican heading the effort to elect more Republicans to the Senate.

On Friday, Mr. Obama will travel to Baltimore to announce specifics of his jobs plan, including a proposed $5,000 tax credit for small businesses for each new employee they hire in 2010. While there, he will address House Republicans at a retreat they are holding.

The instant Republican resistance to the jobs plan — coupled with a vote this week to kill a deficit-reduction panel that had been initiated with high bipartisan hopes — illustrated the chasm between the two parties and the difficulties Mr. Obama faces if he is serious about trying to work with an energized opposition.

Increasingly confident of their prospects after the Massachusetts Senate victory, Republicans are disinclined to give ground in policy debates and appear willing to stick with their near-unanimous opposition to major initiatives unless Democrats offer significant concessions.

“House Republicans will seize the opportunity in respectful terms, but candid and frank terms, and make it clear to the president that we have better solutions,” said Representative Mike Pence of Indiana, the chairman of the House Republican Conference.

The administration showed no signs of capitulating either, with officials saying the White House will pursue a strategy of trying to shame Republicans whenever they stand in lock-step against Mr. Obama. In an interview Thursday, Mr. Emanuel warned that Republicans would suffer politically for their opposition to the pay-as-you-go plan.

“One party was for fiscal discipline, the other party wasn’t,” he said, previewing a message that Democrats could use in this year’s midterm elections.

Officials said they were pressing ahead with one of the more controversial items Mr. Obama laid out Wednesday night: repealing the policy barring gay men and lesbians from serving openly in the military.

Senior Pentagon officials said Defense Secretary Robert M. Gates and Adm. Mike Mullen, the chairman of the Joint Chiefs of Staff, had been in close discussions with Mr. Obama on the issue and would present the Pentagon’s initial plans for carrying out the new policy at a hearing before the Senate Armed Services Committee on Tuesday.

Changing the policy requires an act of Congress, and the officials signaled that Mr. Gates would go slowly, and that repeal of the ban was not imminent. And it could be a hard sell for the president, even among Democrats; Representative Ike Skelton of Missouri, chairman of the House Armed Services Committee, on Thursday restated his opposition to repealing the ban.

Mr. Emanuel, the chief of staff, said he hoped Congressional Democrats would take up the jobs bill next week. Then, in his view, Congress would move to the president’s plan to impose a fee on banks to help offset losses to the Troubled Asset Relief Program, the fund used to bail out banks and automakers.

Lawmakers would next deal with a financial regulatory overhaul, and then pick up where they left off on health care. “All these things start and lead to one place: J-O-B-S,” Mr. Emanuel said.

The execution, of course, will be much easier said than done. Democrats are about to lose their 60-vote supermajority in the Senate, after the recent Republican victory by Scott Brown in a special election to fill the seat held by the late Edward M. Kennedy of Massachusetts. In the Senate, Republicans have come under intense pressure from their colleagues to stay in the fold.

Even some of Mr. Obama’s allies said that given united Republican opposition, the goal of more cooperation might be out of reach. “In order to dance, you need a dance partner and there ain’t no partner out there,” Senator Bernard Sanders, a Vermont independent, noted.

A vote this week on a proposal to create a bipartisan commission to recommend ways to attack rising federal deficits was seen as illustrative of the Republican strategy to thwart Democrats. Though the idea attracted 53 votes — 36 Democrats, one independent and 16 Republicans — it failed because it did not cross the 60-vote threshold.

At least six Republicans who had previously supported the plan voted against it, as did others who have backed the idea in concept. Some of those who voted against the plan suggested they did so because they did not want to give Democrats political cover by joining with them in a deficit reduction effort.

“It was stacked,” Senator John McCain, Republican of Arizona, told reporters in explaining his rationale for switching from a supporter to an opponent of the commission.

Some leading Republicans say they believe there is still an opportunity for the administration, Congressional Democrats and Republicans to find ways to work together. But they say it would require a concerted outreach effort and the White House abandoning the idea of wooing a few individual Republican senators.

“I am astonished that the White House’s idea of working in a bipartisan way is this shooting gallery method, going around and seeing if you can pick off one or two or three,” said Senator Lamar Alexander of Tennessee, a member of the Republican leadership.

Other Republicans say Mr. Obama should convene a summit of Congressional Republican leaders.

“If the president reaches out to the Republican leadership in a genuine way, the spotlight shifts from his overreaching to whether we can meet him in the middle,” said Senator Lindsey Graham, Republican of South Carolina.

Congressional Democrats say they are pessimistic about cooperation. Using their power of 60 for one of the final times, Democrats did secure approval of the antideficit legislation Thursday on a straight 60-40 party-line vote but interpreted the united Republican opposition as a sign that Republicans were not moved by the president’s appeal.

Facing mounting pressure from New York politicians concerned about costs and security, the Obama administration on Thursday began considering moving the trial of the chief organizer of the Sept. 11 terrorist attacks out of Manhattan, administration officials said.

President Obama said through a spokesman that he still believed a civilian criminal trial for Khalid Shaikh Mohammed, who has admitted planning the attacks, and four accomplices could be conducted “successfully and securely in the United States.” He did not mention New York specifically.

Mr. Obama left the decision on possible alternate sites to the Justice Department, which was scrambling to assess the options, administration officials said.

A decision to move the Sept. 11 trial from Manhattan would be a retreat by the administration from its calculated choice in November to bring the defendants to a courthouse just blocks from where the World Trade Center stood.

The dispute over a trial location, touched off when Mayor Michael R. Bloomberg of New York complained of costs and disruption, threatened to reopen the divisive question of how those accused of plotting the murder of more than 3,000 Americans should be brought to justice.

Republicans in the Senate and House said they would try to block financing for civilian criminal trials for the alleged terrorists, seeking to force the administration to place them on trial before a military commission in Guantánamo Bay, Cuba, or on a military base elsewhere.

Opponents of civilian trials said they hoped new doubts about a New York trial and increased fears of terrorism since the attempted airliner bombing on Christmas Day would win more Democratic support for such measures.

The apparent collapse of what had seemed since November to be a settled decision to hold the trial in Lower Manhattan was clear when New York’s senior senator, Charles E. Schumer, a Democrat, said on Thursday that he was encouraging the Obama administration “to find suitable alternatives.”

A Schumer spokesman, Brian Fallon, said the senator was “following the guidance” of Mayor Bloomberg and the New York police commissioner, Raymond W. Kelly, and “shares their concerns about costs, logistics and security.”

Mr. Obama restated his support for a civilian trial, which supporters say would have more legitimacy than a military tribunal. A White House spokesman, Bill Burton, called Mr. Mohammed, the self-described Sept. 11 mastermind, “a murderous thug” and said “the president is committed to seeing that he’s brought to justice.”

Mr. Burton said the president agreed with Attorney General Eric H. Holder Jr. that civilian trials were the right choice. “Currently our federal jails hold hundreds of convicted terrorists, and the president’s opinion has not changed on that,” he said.

Finding a site for a trial rejected by New York City could prove a challenge. Other Southern District locations appeared to pose problems. Some officials mentioned the Eastern District of Virginia, where terror trials have been held, or the unused Illinois prison where the administration has proposed to move detainees from Guantánamo.

A Justice Department spokesman, Dean Boyd, said Thursday night that there had been no decision to shift the trial from Manhattan. He said department officials were confident that the Southern District, where the department’s most experienced terrorism prosecutors work, could handle the case “while minimizing disruptions to the community to the greatest extent possible consistent with security needs.”

City officials have estimated security and logistical costs could total more than $200 million per year for a trial that could last several years, and some politicians have complained that a trial could make the city an even more attractive target for Al Qaeda.

Mr. Bloomberg, who in November had strongly backed Mr. Holder’s decision to bring the Sept. 11 defendants to the city they were accused of attacking, surprised administration officials on Wednesday by saying he had changed his mind. On Thursday, he elaborated, not closing the door to a Manhattan trial but expressing strong preference for another location.

The mayor said “there are places that would be less expensive for the taxpayers and less disruptive” than New York City. “For example,” he said, “military bases away from central cities where it is easier to provide security at much less cost.

“And so, would I prefer that they did it elsewhere? Yes, but if we are called on, we will do what we’re supposed to do.”

Mr. Bloomberg said he called the attorney general on Thursday afternoon to lobby for moving the trial outside Lower Manhattan.

Also on Thursday, Gov. David A. Paterson repeated his longstanding opposition to a Manhattan trial, and several more politicians expressed doubts or outright opposition.

New York’s junior senator, Kirsten E. Gillibrand, a Democrat, agreed and said she was “open to alternative locations,” adding that she remained committed to a federal criminal trial. And eight elected officials from Manhattan wrote to Mr. Holder to say a trial in the borough would be “extremely burdensome.”

They said they backed a criminal trial but asked for a review of other possible sites in the Southern District of New York, which includes Manhattan, the Bronx and six counties north of the city.

In Washington, Congressional Republicans who have long opposed criminal trials said they hoped to use the debate over trial locations to steer the cases back to military commissions.

Representative Peter T. King, Republican of New York, introduced legislation on Wednesday that would block financing for civilian trials for those accused of plotting the Sept. 11 attacks, and Senator Lindsey Graham, Republican of South Carolina, said he would introduce a parallel bill in the Senate next week.

Mr. Graham, an experienced military prosecutor who has long argued that foreign terrorists should be treated as enemy combatants, proposed a similar amendment in November but it failed to pass the Senate by 54 to 45. He said he believed the same measure could pass today.

But the administration is anything but eager to reopen a debate over whether civilian or military trials were the right choice. Other Southern District sites come with their own problems.

Among the sites mentioned are Stewart Air National Guard Base near Newburgh and a federal prison at Otisville. But the base has no court or prison facilities, and the prison has no courtroom, their spokesmen said.

Another possibility might be the federal courthouse in White Plains, 30 miles north of Manhattan, a city of more than 50,000. But the mayor, Adam T. Bradley, said he had deep concerns about security. “I think we need to be realistic,” he said. “Once you’ve placed it in a place like White Plains, you’ve made the city an automatic target, and everything located in it.”

What really knocked readers out about “The Catcher in the Rye” was the wonderfully immediate voice that J. D. Salinger fashioned for Holden Caulfield — a voice that enabled him to channel an alienated 16-year-old’s thoughts and anxieties and frustrations, a voice that skeptically appraised the world and denounced its phonies and hypocrites and bores.

Mr. Salinger had such unerring radar for the feelings of teenage angst and vulnerability and anger that “Catcher,” published in 1951, remains one of the books that adolescents first fall in love with — a book that intimately articulates what it is to be young and sensitive and precociously existential, a book that first awakens them to the possibilities of literature.

Whether it’s Holden or the whiz-kid Glass children or the shell-shocked soldier in “For Esmé — with Love and Squalor,” Mr. Salinger’s people tend to be outsiders — spiritual voyagers shipwrecked in a vulgar and materialistic world, misfits who never really outgrew adolescent feelings of estrangement. They identify with children and cling to the innocence of childhood with a ferocity bordering on desperation: Holden wants to be the catcher in the rye, who keeps kids from falling off a cliff; Seymour communes with a little girl on the beach about bananafish, before going upstairs to his hotel room and shooting himself in the head.

Such characters have a yearning for some greater spiritual truth, but they are also given to an adolescent either/or view of the world and tend to divide people into categories: the authentic and the phony, those with an understanding of “the main current of poetry that flows through things” and those coarse, unenlightened morons who will never get it — a sprawling category, it turns out, that includes everyone from pompous college students parroting trendy lit crit theories to fashionable, well-fed theater-goers to self-satisfied blowhards who recount every play in a football game or proudly wear tattersall vests.

Like Franny, Mr. Salinger’s people feel that “everything everybody does is so — I don’t know — not wrong, or even mean, or even stupid necessarily. But just so tiny and meaningless and — sad-making.”

Mr. Salinger was able to empathetically limn the nooks and crannies of his youthful narrator’s psyches, while conjuring up a sophisticated, post-F. Scott Fitzgerald, post-World War II Manhattan — a world familiar to his New Yorker readers, bounded by Radio City Music Hall and Bergdorf Goodman and Central Park (where Holden wonders about the ducks on the lagoon and where they go when it freezes over in the winter). In doing so, he not only domesticated the innovations of the great modernists — their ability to manipulate stream of consciousness, to probe their characters’ inner lives — but he also presaged the self-inventorying characters of Philip Roth and Saul Bellow, and the navel-gazing musings of the writers of many Me Generations to come.

Some critics dismissed the easy surface charm of Mr. Salinger’s work, accusing him of cuteness and sentimentality, but works like “Catcher,” “Franny and Zooey” and his best-known short stories would influence successive generations of writers. His most persuasive work showcased his colloquial, idiomatic language, his uncanny gift for ventriloquism, his nimble ability to create stories within stories, as well as his unerring ear for cosmopolitan New Yorkese (what he called an “Ear for the Rhythms and Cadences of Colloquial Speech”) and his heat-seeking eye for the telling gesture — the nervously lit cigarette, the X-ray look, the inhibited station-platform kiss.

Like Holden Caulfield, the Glass children — Franny, Zooey, Buddy, Seymour, Boo Boo, Walt, Waker — would emerge as avatars of adolescent angst and Mr. Salinger’s own alienated stance toward the world. Bright, charming and gregarious, they are blessed with their creator’s ability to entertain, and they appeal to the reader to identify with their braininess, their sensitivity, their febrile specialness. And yet as details of their lives unfurl in a series of stories, it becomes clear that there is a darker side to their estrangement as well: a tendency to condescend to the vulgar masses, an almost incestuous familial self-involvement and a difficulty relating to other people that will result in emotional crises and in Seymour’s case, suicide. “Neither you nor Buddy know how to talk to people you don’t like,” Zooey’s mother says, adding, “You can’t live in the world with such strong likes and dislikes.”

Over time, Mr. Salinger’s work grew more elliptical. Tidy, well-made tales like “A Perfect Day for Bananafish” gave way to the increasingly prolix “Zooey” and the shapeless ruminations of “Seymour — An Introduction.” And as his Glass stories grew more and more self-conscious and self-referential, readers became increasingly aware of the solipsism of that hothouse family of geniuses.

“Seymour” is a long, vexing monologue by Buddy Glass about his late brother that coyly conflates the identity of Buddy and Mr. Salinger (playing the sort of mirror games that Mr. Roth would play with his semiautobiographical heroes). And “Hapworth 16, 1924” (which appeared in the New Yorker magazine in 1965) takes the form of a verbose, digression-filled letter ostensibly written from summer camp by the 7 -year-old Seymour. The story actually serves as a revisionist history of the Glass family and a sort of defensive gibe by Mr. Salinger at his critics. Having been accused of loving his characters too much, of being too superficially charming, the author gave us a new take on one of his heroes, turning the once saintly Seymour — the family’s “blue-striped unicorn,” “consultant genius” and “portable conscience” — into an obnoxious child given to angry outbursts and implausible intellectual boasts.

That story — the last work published during the author’s lifetime — not only reflected Mr. Salinger’s own Glass-like withdrawal from the world but also underscored his own fear that he might one day “disappear entirely, in my own methods, locutions, and mannerisms.” Yet however sour and self-reflexive that tale was, it would never eclipse the achievement of “Catcher” in the minds of Mr. Salinger’s fans — a novel that still knocks people out, a novel, if you really want to hear about it, that is still cherished, nearly six decades after its publication, for its pitch-perfect portrait of adolescence and its indispensable hero.

They have been dueling without boats and without salt water in their faces for nearly three years. Instead of the customary helmsmen and bowmen, the combatants in the 33rd America’s Cup have been the lawyers and public-relations specialists pushing the opposing agendas of the team owners Larry Ellison of BMW Oracle Racing and Alinghi’s Ernesto Bertarelli, who said this week that he would forfeit the Cup if he lost his latest court battle.

After all the legal briefs and rulings, and even with both teams finally back in Valencia, Spain, in their huge, new multihull yachts at ever-more expense, there is still a chance that they will not race for the Cup at all.

The plan — court-ordered for now — is that the yachts will begin a best-of-three regatta Feb. 8 off Valencia. But with less than two weeks to go, they continue to bicker. The Golden Gate Yacht Club, the San Francisco club that BMW Oracle represents, has filed yet another legal challenge in the New York Supreme Court, claiming that the 3DL sails that Alinghi plans to use violate Cup rules because they were not made in Switzerland, where Alinghi’s yacht club, Société Nautique de Genève, is based.

Bertarelli has a different view. If he loses on the sails, he said, he will forfeit the Cup that he won in 2003 in New Zealand and successfully defended in 2007 in Valencia.

“If we can’t use those sails, then I’ll organize the party for Larry in New York,” Bertarelli said by phone from Valencia, referring to Ellison. “I’ll send him the Champagne and say, Good on you, mate, you won the America’s Cup in court.”

On Thursday, Fred Meyer, vice commodore of S.N.G., confirmed on the Alinghi Web site that “there will be no match” if the sails are disqualified.

Ellison, an American billionaire, was not available for comment and was not yet in Valencia, where his team is training in its 100-foot trimaran with its innovative solid wing sail. But Russell Coutts, BMW Oracle’s skipper, said he did not believe that Alinghi would forfeit the first America’s Cup between two multihulls.

There has, of course, been a shortage of trust in this increasingly hostile dispute in which BMW Oracle has steadily chipped away at Alinghi’s plans, prevailing on nearly every legal issue as it successfully fought to be challenger of record and hold this rare one-on-one Cup in Valencia.

Bertarelli sounds skeptical of the process, citing a comment from Bruno Troublé, a former America’s Cup skipper from France.

“One of the few intelligent things that Bruno Troublé said these last few years was that Alinghi going to court in the U.S. against a U.S. team is like going to complain to your mother-in-law,” he said.

Bertarelli said he respected the judicial process, but added that the court was not equipped, with its limited expertise and time, “to look into questions which are so specific to a sport and a tradition which is 167 years long.”

As the dispute has deepened, the antagonists have adopted similar tones and language, with each calling the other a bully and accusing it of obstructing reasonable agreements and seeking to delay the start of racing.

The Deed of Gift, the 1887 document that governs the America’s Cup, states that a defender must use a “yacht or vessel constructed in the country” of the club that holds the Cup. Alinghi claims that sails are not covered by that rule and that, even if they were, Alinghi’s were designed and finished in Switzerland, although the base material was molded in a factory in Nevada.

Coutts said BMW Oracle had been prepared to concede the sail issue as part of negotiations in Singapore earlier this month, but decided to file the suit after the talks broke down. S.N.G. filed opposition papers last week, as well a countermotion that accuses BMW Oracle of violating the same constructed-in-country principal because, although its yacht was built in the United States, its design is based on a giant French multihull. S.N.G. also alleges the BMW Oracle yacht uses German and Italian technology and further violates the deed by using a solid wing for propulsion that does not meet the established definition of a sail.

“When you live in a glass house, don’t throw stones,” said Bertarelli, who added that S.N.G. would withdraw its suit if BMW would also do so.

“Let’s see who’s fastest, and let’s have Larry come and sail his own boat,” Bertarelli said. “Because right now, the way it looks, the only thing which is American in his boat is his money.”

Coutts dismissed Bertarelli’s call for an end to litigation.

“We don’t want to go and race an illegal boat,” he said. “We want the rules sorted out now, and we want both parties to play by the same rules. The whole problem with this is there seems to be from the other side this expectation that they should be allowed to break the rules.”

Bertarelli said he believed that, as the defending champion, he should have a natural advantage according to the Deed of Gift, even if he lost his chance to name the venue when the New York Supreme Court last fall rejected his choice of Ras-al-Khaimah in the United Arab Emirates as being out of compliance with the deed.

“The America’s Cup is a bit like the Davis Cup in tennis,” he said. “We won the right to set the regatta. It’s an S.N.G. regatta. If you don’t like it, don’t play the Davis Cup. If you don’t like to play Spain, because you can’t play on clay, don’t play Spain.”

One of the critical issues is wind limits, with Coutts claiming that Alinghi is trying to impose a 15-knot maximum for starting a race, while BMW Oracle is fighting for a broader range and has protested.

“The deed does not give the defender the right to choose the wind,” Coutts said. “Unfortunately, I can pretty much predict which boat will win or lose depending on the wind. That’s obvious. Alinghi’s boat is very moded toward light wind conditions and our boat subsequently is moded toward stronger winds.”

This complaint is to be adjudicated by a race jury, not a court. But at this stage, it seems unlikely that litigation will end if and when the match takes place in Valencia.

There is the chance of the result being challenged; there is also the breach-of-fiduciary duty lawsuit filed last year by the Golden Gate Yacht Club that accuses the Swiss team of mismanaging the Cup and alleges that Bertarelli made side business deals that allowed him to circumvent the Cup rules governing the operation of a charitable trust.

“All lies,” said Bertarelli, who considers the suit a tactical move to get negotiating leverage and to damage his image and reputation. Coutts disagrees.

“There are some fundamental issues involved there about the behavior of a trustee,” he said. “And I actually think it really is important for the future of the competition that those sorts of issues are resolved, irrespective of what happens with this race.”

Apple has generated a lot of chatter with its new iPad tablet. But it may not be quite the conversation it wanted.

Many women are saying the name evokes awkward associations with feminine hygiene products. People from Boston to Ireland are complaining that “iPad,” in their regional brogue, sounds almost indistinguishable from “iPod,” Apple’s music player. The problem may be worse outside the United States; Japanese does not even have a sound for the “a” in iPad.

Then there are more serious conflicts. Two other high-tech companies already market products called iPad and are laying claim to the trademark.

In the hours after the iPad announcement on Wednesday, “iTampon” became one of the most popular trending topics on Twitter. Apple’s communication team fielded a wave of queries on the subject but characteristically declined to comment.

“I care about words and their connotations, but you don’t have to be in junior high to make this leap,” said Robin Bernstein, a corporate speech writer on Long Island, who addressed the issue on her Facebook page on Wednesday. “A lot of women when they hear the word ‘pad’ are going to think about feminine hygiene.”

Michael Cronan, a naming consultant in Berkeley, Calif., whose company has helped come up with brands like TiVo and Kindle, said many naming experiments show that women tend to reflexively relate words like “pad” and “flow” to bodily concerns.

He is not sure Apple could have found an alternative that ties in as perfectly to its famous brands. “I think we’re going to get over this fairly quickly and we’ll get on with enjoying the experience.”

But the folks at Fujitsu, the Japanese technology firm, may not be quite so eager to forgive and forget. The company has applied for the iPad trademark in the United States and already sells an iPad — a $2,000 hand-held device that shop clerks use to check inventory.

STMicroelectronics, the Swiss semiconductor company, owns the iPad trademark in Europe and uses it as an acronym for integrated passive and active devices — which sounds less fun than playing games on a tablet. (A third company, MagTek of Seal Beach, Calif., makes a portable magnetic card reader of the same name.)

These kinds of naming conflicts have not stopped Apple before. In 2007, on the eve of the introduction of the iPhone, the technology giant Cisco Systems pointed out that it already sold an Internet handset called the iPhone. Steven P. Jobs, Apple’s chief executive, led the negotiation for the name, peppering Cisco executives with calls at all hours, and telling them he was prepared to claim that Cisco was underutilizing the trademark.

Mr. Jobs finally persuaded Cisco to surrender the trademark with a vague promise to market their products jointly — a partnership that never materialized.

“He’s a very tough businessman and tough negotiator,” said Charles Giancarlo, a former Cisco executive who dealt directly with Mr. Jobs on the issue. “I feel sorry for the poor guy at Fujitsu who is going to be negotiating with Steve directly.”

 Scott Roeder, the man charged with murder in the shooting of George R. Tiller, one of the few doctors in the country to perform late-term abortions, took the witness stand in his own defense on Thursday, and said that, yes, he did it.

Yes, he bought a gun. Yes, he took target practice. Yes, he had learned about Dr. Tiller’s habits, his home address, his security precautions. And, yes, he shot Dr. Tiller last May 31 as Dr. Tiller stood inside his church.

“That is correct, yes,” Mr. Roeder told the jurors, in a calm, matter-of-fact voice.

But there was a twist.

Lawyers for Mr. Roeder, who provided the only testimony for the defense in a trial that has spanned several weeks, are hoping that jurors will consider Mr. Roeder’s motive: his growing opposition to abortion, which he deemed criminal and immoral, and his mounting sense that laws and prosecutors and other abortion opponents were never going to stop Dr. Tiller from performing them.

“I did what I thought was needed to be done to protect the children. I shot him,” he testified, adding at another point, “If I didn’t do it, the babies were going to die the next day.”

Was he remorseful? No, Mr. Roeder said without emotion. After the killing, he said, he felt “a sense of relief.”

And so, in a way, the hearing here, watched intensely by all sides of the abortion debate, turned into precisely what the presiding judge had said all along that it ought not to be — a trial over abortion. Judge Warren Wilbert has wrestled with requests from the prosecution and the defense over how to permit Mr. Roeder to mount a murder defense without allowing him to turn the case into a public forum on abortion.

But even with his pointed testimony, based on a ruling late Thursday by Judge Wilbert, Mr. Roeder continues to face a difficult legal hurdle in beating back a charge of first-degree murder.

Judge Wilbert ruled that he would not instruct the jury to consider a lesser charge when they begin deliberations on Friday. Mr. Roeder has pleaded not guilty to murder, but defense lawyers had argued that his beliefs about abortion might warrant a voluntary manslaughter conviction if jurors concluded that Mr. Roeder possessed, as Kansas law defines it, “an unreasonable but honest belief that circumstances existed that justified deadly force.”

Seated on the witness stand, facing a tiny courtroom gallery that included Dr. Tiller’s widow, Jeanne, abortion opponents from other parts of the country, and national abortion rights supporters, Mr. Roeder seemed quiet, almost lawyerly, in his responses to inquiries about the killing, in which Dr. Tiller was shot in the forehead, the gun pressed to his skin.

Mr. Roeder, 51, of Kansas City, Mo., told jurors that he had a growing sense of his own faith and opposition to abortion in the 1990s after watching “The 700 Club,” the evangelist Pat Robertson’s television talk show. Mr. Roeder’s views on religion and abortion, he said, went “hand in hand.”

Mr. Roeder acknowledged under cross-examination that he had, as early as 1993, thought about killing Dr. Tiller. A year before the shooting, he said, he had gone to Dr. Tiller’s church with a gun intending to shoot him. (Dr. Tiller was not there that day, he said.) And he said he considered other alternatives: cutting off Dr. Tiller’s hands with a sword, shooting him from a distance with a rifle, or finding him at his house.

Of his decision to go to the church, he said, “It was the only window of opportunity I saw that he could be stopped.”

Abortion opponents here, including some who have served time in jail for abortion clinic violence, praised Mr. Roeder for his testimony. But some complained bitterly that Judge Wilbert had severely limited the defense by barring the testimony of Phill Kline, a former Kansas attorney general who had unsuccessfully pursued criminal investigations against Dr. Tiller and by preventing jurors from considering some conviction short of murder.

Abortion rights supporters, meanwhile, called Mr. Roeder’s statements deeply chilling, and said they mandated nothing short than a first-degree murder conviction, which could carry a life sentence. “It should send a message that there is no justification for this,” said Vicki Saporta, the president of the National Abortion Federation, who sat in the court.

Over four days, prosecutors laid out a case that rarely dealt with abortion, but stuck instead to dates and times and forensic and witness evidence implicating Mr. Roeder in the Tiller shooting. Abortion rights supporters said that was as it should be: this was murder, plain and simple.

By the middle of the week, the courthouse had drawn some of the most outspoken members of the abortion debate from around the country.

“George Tiller shed the blood of 60,000 innocent children,” Randall Terry, the founder of Operation Rescue, told reporters. Mr. Terry (who is in a legal dispute over the use of the group’s name with Operation Rescue’s current president, Troy Newman) said that he was neither condoning nor condemning Mr. Roeder’s actions, but that people should remember the children.

Days after Mr. Roeder’s arrest, the United States Department of Justice announced it was investigating Dr. Tiller’s death to determine whether there was anyone else involved in the plot. On Thursday, Mr. Roeder acknowledged that he has friends who, like him, believe that the killing of abortion doctors is justifiable. One such friend, Shelley Shannon, was imprisoned for shooting Dr. Tiller in both arms in 1993. Still, Mr. Roeder said on Thursday, he acted alone.

Justice Department representatives are “actively monitoring” Mr. Roeder’s case, a department spokesman said, adding, “Our investigation into the murder of Dr. Tiller is open and ongoing.”

Guided by lawyers, Mr. Roeder methodically described the morning of the shooting — how he had fired the gun inside the church, driven away from Wichita, hidden the gun in a small town, and picked up a snack, a pizza. In the days after the killing, Dr. Tiller’s family announced that it would close the abortion clinic, the only one in Wichita.

So, Nola Foulston, the prosecutor asked him, do you feel you have successfully completed your mission?

“He’s been stopped,” Mr. Roeder said.

But do you feel you have successfully completed your mission, she asked again.

“Yes,” he said.

For roughly two decades, Alan R. Mulally, Ford Motor’s chief executive, has been an unabashed fan of the Toyota Motor Company.

As a Boeing executive in the early 1990s, he made a pilgrimage to Japan to study Toyota’s manufacturing methods, which he used to speed up assembly of Boeing’s 777 jets.

When he joined Ford in late 2006, Mr. Mulally liberally borrowed from Toyota’s playbook — focusing on fuel efficiency, quality and so-called global cars to sell in markets around the world. He even hired away a top Toyota executive, James Farley.

“The finest production system in the world,” Mr. Mulally called Toyota during a dinner with journalists in December 2006.

This week, at least, the student is doing better than the teacher.

Ford, which managed to skirt the problems that forced crosstown rivals General Motors and Chrysler to seek government bailouts, reported a surprising profit on Thursday of $2.7 billion for 2009, its first in four years.

The sharp swing to profit for Ford, from a record loss of more than $14 billion in 2008, stands in sharp contrast to current problems at Toyota, which is struggling to contain the fallout of a global recall over concerns about accelerator pedals.

The fact that Ford is surging while Toyota — the same company whose success has caused the Detroit automakers to lay off thousands of workers — is stumbling is not lost on Bill Jackson, president of United Automobile Workers Local 588 in Chicago Heights, Ill.

“There’s some sympathy and some irony there,” he said. “A lot more irony than sympathy, though.”

Because of its profits, Ford plans to issue profit-sharing checks of roughly $450 each to its 43,000 hourly workers.

“A year ago, we did not know where our fate was; the Big Three were getting hammered in Congress and we were on a downward spiral,” said Mr. Jackson, who represents 700 workers at a Ford stamping plant that is going to be adding jobs. “In a year, it’s turned around.”

Ford’s profit for 2009 — which Mr. Mulally called a “historic and pivotal” year — partly results from deep cost cuts and layoffs. Ford’s hourly work force is now less than half what it was five years ago. But Ford also took the risky step of borrowing more than $23 billion in 2006, giving it enough cash to weather the sharp downturn in the industry.

In addition, Ford continued introducing new vehicles, and marketing their fuel efficiency. Consumers showed they were willing to buy them even without the heavy incentives that undercut the Detroit automakers’ business in the past.

“They looked like a company in its death throes,” said Louis E. Lataif, a former Ford executive who is dean of the Boston University School of Management. “To their credit, they kept their focus on what really mattered, which is product, and at the end of the day that’s going to carry the company.”

Stock in Ford reflects its improvement. The shares slipped 14 cents, to $11.41, on Thursday but are up from less than $2 as recently as last February.

Ford executives were also managing expectations on Thursday, saying they still faced many challenges. The company has $25.5 billion in cash on hand, nearly twice the amount from a year ago.

But it still owes more than it has in its reserves and it is carrying more debt than its competitors. It paid $1.5 billion in interest last year.

“We know we have some work to do to improve our balance sheet,” Ford’s chief financial officer, Lewis W. K. Booth, said in an interview. “I don’t feel anything other than a sense of great urgency when it comes to improving the business. We know that nobody is guaranteed a future.”

Mr. Booth said Ford expected to have an operating profit and positive cash flow in 2010. Previously, executives had set 2011 as a target for consistent profitability.

As of Jan. 1, Ford — as well as G.M. and Chrysler — eliminated responsibility for health care coverage for hourly retirees, which now is handled by a U.A.W. trust fund.

In addition, Ford said it cut its annual structural costs by $5.1 billion in 2009, $1 billion more than it had planned.

The profit was a cause for celebration for Ford workers who in recent years elected to turn down lucrative buyouts in the hope that the company still had a future.

The profit-sharing checks that plant workers will receive in March are the first that any Detroit automaker will have given out since 2006. Still, they are a pittance compared with the $8,000 payments Ford made a decade ago, when it even had enough money to fly banner-toting planes over some Michigan factories to thank employees.

Ford was profitable in every region of the world in the fourth quarter, including North America for the second consecutive quarter. North America has been the greatest source of difficulty for all automakers, but it was Ford’s most profitable region in the quarter, with pretax earnings of $707 million, excluding one-time items.

On the year, Ford increased market share in the United States for the first time since 1995. For all of 2009, Ford’s market share rose to 16.1 percent, from 15 percent in 2008.

Ford earned $868 million in the fourth quarter over all, in contrast with a loss of $6 billion a year earlier. Its overall operating profit for 2009, excluding one-time items like charges for retiree health care and a windfall from a debt-restructuring effort, was $454 million. Its financing arm, Ford Motor Credit, posted a 2009 profit of $1.9 billion, after losing $495 million in 2008. Sales in the fourth quarter rose to $35.4 billion, from $29 billion a year earlier.

“During the worst economic recession in 30 or 40 years,” Mr. Mulally said in a conference call with analysts and reporters, “because of the strength of the plan we put in place a few years ago, we were not only able to survive but also to create a foundation that is delivering now profitable growth during that year.”

The Senate gave Ben S. Bernanke a second four-year term as the head of the Federal Reserve on Thursday after critics excoriated the central bank’s conduct in the years leading up to the financial crisis.

The 70-to-30 vote was the weakest endorsement ever extended to a chairman in the Fed’s 96-year history.

The confirmation was a victory for President Obama, who had called Mr. Bernanke an architect of the recovery, but also signaled the extent to which the Fed, once little known to the public, has become the object of outrage over high unemployment and bank bailouts.

In several hours of debate, senators said that the Fed had abetted, then ignored, the housing and credit bubbles and allowed banks to keep dangerously low capital reserves and to make reckless lending decisions that ruined consumers. Some even blamed Mr. Bernanke for the falling dollar and questioned his commitment to free enterprise.

In contrast, Mr. Bernanke’s supporters were muted. They reiterated that the Fed had made mistakes but said that Mr. Bernanke had helped save the economy from a far worse recession.

After a week in which top White House officials and Mr. Bernanke met with Democratic leaders in the Senate to secure support, the Senate first voted 77 to 23 to end debate, with more than the 60 votes needed to overcome the threat of a filibuster.

On a second vote, to confirm, the 30 dissents came from 18 Republicans, 11 Democrats and one independent, Bernard Sanders of Vermont.

On Thursday evening, Mr. Obama congratulated Mr. Bernanke in a statement. “As the nation continues to face the consequences of the worst recession in a generation, Ben Bernanke has provided wisdom and steady leadership in the midst of the financial and economic crisis,” he said.

While an arm-twisting campaign by the administration limited the opposition, the outcry against the Fed will most likely continue rippling through economic policy generally, and Mr. Bernanke’s leadership of the Fed in particular. The effects could be felt first in the debate over how to reform financial regulations. The Obama administration has proposed consolidating risk regulation under the Fed, while some in Congress want to strip away its oversight authority.

“The institutional prestige of the Fed, even apart from this vote, had taken a hit, and it started back around the disaster of September 2008,” said Stephen H. Axilrod, who worked at the Fed for 34 years and wrote a history of its monetary policies. “I don’t think it has recovered. This is a low point in the Fed’s recent history, that’s for sure.”

The vote also made clear Congress’s insistence on transparency from a historically secretive institution that has made extraordinary interventions in the market since 2008.

“The Fed is going to have to work hard, for a long period, to regain the public confidence of the sort it enjoyed during the halcyon days when everything was going so swimmingly,” said Barry Eichengreen, professor of economics and political science at the University of California, Berkeley.

Senators from opposite ends of the spectrum formed unlikely alliances. After Mr. Sanders, who calls himself a socialist, finished denouncing Mr. Bernanke, Jeff Sessions, a conservative Republican from Alabama, rose to do the same.

Another Alabaman, Richard C. Shelby, the top Republican on the banking committee, which approved the nomination last month by a 16-to-7 vote, laid out a bill of particulars, saying Mr. Bernanke’s handling of the financial crisis did not make up for his failings before that time.

“Considerable economic devastation occurred as a result of Chairman Bernanke’s loose monetary policy and weak regulatory oversight,” Mr. Shelby said. “If we don’t hold Chairman Bernanke accountable, what precedent are we setting for future regulators?”

To an extent, the rhetoric against Mr. Bernanke reflected a spilling-over of frustration at two of his collaborators: the former Treasury secretary, Henry M. Paulson Jr., and the current one, Timothy F. Geithner.

And looming over it all was the role of Mr. Bernanke’s predecessor, Alan Greenspan, whose once-sterling reputation has been diminished as his decisions to keep interest rates low after the 2001 recession have been brought into question.

Mr. Bernanke, 56, was a member of the Fed’s board for part of that period, from 2002 to 2005, when President George W. Bush named him to lead his Council of Economic Advisers. He rejoined the Fed, as chairman, in 2006, and Mr. Obama renominated him last year. Mr. Bernanke is a Republican economist and an authority on the Depression.

“I knew that he would continue the legacy of Alan Greenspan, and I was right,” said Senator Jim Bunning, Republican of Kentucky, who was the lone vote against Mr. Bernanke in 2005.

Mr. Bunning cited a half-dozen statements from 2007 to 2009 in which Mr. Bernanke expressed optimism about the housing market, bank capital ratios, the capitalization of Fannie Mae and Freddie Mac and the unemployment rate. Saying that Mr. Bernanke had been repeatedly wrong, he declared, “We shouldn’t be paying the Fed chairman to learn on the job.”

Senator Sheldon Whitehouse, Democrat of Rhode Island, echoed that, saying Mr. Bernanke had shown “a troubling pattern of false confidence.” Senator Jeff Merkley, Democrat of Oregon, went further, saying the Fed had “helped set the fire that destroyed our economy.”

While less passionate, supporters of Mr. Bernanke said he had acted deftly and decisively, at least since the collapse of Lehman Brothers in September 2008.

“He basically allowed the Fed to become the lender of the nation,” said Senator Judd Gregg, Republican of New Hampshire. “Nobody had ever done that. The way he did it was extraordinary in its creativity, and the results were that the country’s financial system did not collapse.”

The last time any nominee for chairman faced such opposition was 1983, when the Senate confirmed Paul A. Volcker to a second term on an 84-to-16 vote. Mr. Volcker, too, had served under presidents of opposing parties and had navigated the Fed through a difficult recession.

But while Mr. Volcker sharply raised interest rates to tame runaway inflation — actions that were initially unpopular but were later praised — Mr. Bernanke faces a different challenge. The Fed has held short-term interest rates near zero since December 2008, a policy reaffirmed on Wednesday. And while analysts expect rates to start rising later this year, the scale and timing of that rise will be a challenge. So, too, will be the unwinding of the Fed’s emergency lending programs and its purchase of $1.25 trillion in mortgage-backed securities.

Many politicians will not want the Fed to put the brakes on recovery by raising rates. Indeed, the Senate majority leader, Harry Reid of Nevada, offered only a lukewarm endorsement last week after telling Mr. Bernanke that the Fed must do more to ease lending to households and small businesses. While the Fed says Mr. Bernanke gave Mr. Reid no specific commitments, the central bank will continue to face close scrutiny.

“Their independence from political pressures has been tarnished,” Mr. Axilrod said. “And if the market believes the Fed will not control inflation, there will be more inflation.”

For more than a year, this village has been a focus of weekly protests against the Israeli security barrier, which cuts through its lands. Now, the village appears to be at the center of an intensifying Israeli arrest campaign.

Apparently concerned that the protests could spread, the Israeli Army and security forces have recently begun clamping down, arresting scores of local organizers and activists here and conducting nighttime raids on the homes of others.

Muhammad Amira, a schoolteacher and a member of Nilin’s popular committee, the group that organizes the protests, said his home was raided by the army in the early hours of Jan. 10. The soldiers checked his identity papers, poked around the house and looked in on his sleeping children, Mr. Amira said.

He added, “They came to say, ‘We know who you are.’ ”

Each Friday for the last five years, Palestinians have demonstrated against the barrier, bolstered by Israeli sympathizers and foreign volunteers who document the ensuing clashes with video cameras, often posting the most dramatic footage on YouTube.

Israel says the barrier, under construction since 2002, is essential to prevent suicide bombers from reaching its cities; the Palestinians oppose it on grounds that much of it runs through the territory of the West Bank.

While the weekly protests are billed as nonviolent resistance, they usually end in violent confrontations between the Israeli security forces and masked, stone-throwing Palestinian youths. “These are not sit-ins with people singing ‘We Shall Overcome,’ ” said Maj. Peter Lerner, a spokesman for the Israeli Army’s Central Command, which controls the West Bank. “These are violent, illegal, dangerous riots.”

Other Palestinians are “jumping on the bandwagon,” he said, and the protests “could slip out of control.”

The protests first took hold in the nearby village of Bilin, which became a symbol of Palestinian defiance after winning a ruling in the Israeli Supreme Court stipulating that the barrier must be rerouted to take in less agricultural land. According to military officials, work to move the barrier will start next month.

Like a creeping, part-time intifada, the Friday protests have been gaining ground. Nabi Saleh, another village near Ramallah, has become the newest focus of clashes, after Jewish settlers took over a natural spring on village land.

One recent Friday, a group of older villagers marched toward the spring. They were met with tear gas and stun grenades, and scuffled with soldiers on the road. Other villagers spilled down the hillsides swinging slingshots and pelted the Israelis with stones.

“Israel recognizes the threat of the popular movement and its potential for expanding,” said Jonathan Pollak, an Israeli anarchist and spokesman of the Popular Struggle Coordination Committee, which is based in Ramallah. “I think the goal is to quash it before it gets out of hand.”

In recent months the Palestinian Authority president, Mahmoud Abbas, and other leaders of the mainstream Fatah Party have adopted Bilin as a model of legitimate resistance.

The movement has also begun to attract international support. The Popular Struggle Coordination Committee receives financing from a Spanish governmental agency, according to the committee’s coordinator, Mohammed Khatib of Bilin.

“Bilin is no longer about the struggle for Bilin,” said Mr. Khatib, who was arrested in August and has been awaiting trial on an incitement charge. “This is part of a national struggle,” he said, adding that ending the Israeli occupation was the ultimate goal. Before dawn on Thursday soldiers came to Mr. Khatib’s home in Bilin and took him away again.

Israel security officials vehemently deny that they are acting to suppress civil disobedience, saying that security is their only concern. Among other things, they argue that the popular committees encourage demonstrators to sabotage the barrier, which Israel sees as a vital security tool.

The Israeli authorities have also turned their attention to the foreign activists, deporting those who have overstayed visas or violated their terms. In one case soldiers conducted a raid in the center of Ramallah, where the Palestinian Authority has its headquarters, to remove a Czech woman who had been working for the International Solidarity Movement, a pro-Palestinian group.

Israeli human rights groups like B’Tselem and Yesh Din have long complained of harsh measures used to quell the protests, including rubber bullets and .22-caliber live ammunition. The Israeli authorities say the live fire is meant to be used only in dangerous situations, and not for crowd control. But the human rights groups say that weapons are sometimes misused, apparently with impunity, with members of the security forces rarely held to account.

About a hundred soldiers and border police officers have been wounded in the clashes since 2008, according to the military. But the protesters are unarmed, their advocates argue, while the Israelis sometimes respond with potentially lethal force.

Tristan Anderson, 38, an American activist from Oakland, Calif., was severely wounded when he was struck in the forehead by a high-velocity tear-gas canister during a confrontation in Nilin last March.

After months in an Israeli hospital, Mr. Anderson has regained some movement on one side, and has started to talk. But he has serious brain damage, according to his mother, Nancy, and the prognosis is unclear.

The Andersons’ Israeli lawyer, Michael Sfard, is convinced that the tear-gas projectile was fired directly at the protesters, contrary to regulations. Yet the Israeli authorities who investigated the episode recently decided to close the case without filing charges.

The investigation found that the Israeli security forces had acted in line with regulations, according to Israeli officials. But witnesses insist the projectile was fired from a rise only about 60 yards from where Mr. Anderson stood. If it had been fired properly, in an arc, they contend, it would have flown hundreds of yards. Nineteen Palestinians have been killed in confrontations over the barrier since 2004. A month after Mr. Anderson was wounded, Bassem Abu Rahmah, a well-known Bilin activist, was killed when a similar type of tear-gas projectile struck him in the chest.

Aqel Srur, of Nilin, one of three Palestinians who gave testimony to the Israeli police in the Anderson case, was killed by a .22-caliber bullet in June.

So far, the activists seem undeterred. Salah Muhammad Khawajeh, a Nilin popular committee member and another local witness in the Anderson case, related that when he was summoned for questioning two months ago, he was warned that he could end up like Mr. Srur.

Mr. Khawajeh’s son, 9, was wounded in the back of the head by a rubber bullet at a protest this month.

But as Mr. Khawajeh put it, “We still come.”

 It seemed a spirited defense of his nation’s reputation: calling organized crime groups “a terrible pathology,” Prime Minister Silvio Berlusconi on Thursday criticized movies and television shows that fictionalized the Mafia for giving Italy “a negative image abroad.”

Such shows, he said, were “an ugly trend” that he hoped would end soon.

Yet if anyone can help stop the trend, perhaps it is Mr. Berlusconi himself. His Mediaset company, Italy’s largest private broadcaster, showed “The Sopranos” to great success on one of its pay channels, while its Canale 5, a free channel, has shown “The Boss of Bosses,” a 2007 miniseries about the Sicilian Mafia boss Salvatore (Totò) Riina, and “The Last Godfather,” a 2008 program about the Sicilian boss Bernardo Provenzano.

In baroque Italy, where image and reality are so intertwined that the term hypocrisy seems inadequate, many did not even blink. “Those are the typical things you say when you go in an area with high Mafia density,” said Gianluca Nicoletti, a radio commentator. Besides, he added, “I don’t think he said it with great conviction.”

In his 2006 best seller “Gomorrah,” on the Camorra, or the Neapolitan Mafia, Roberto Saviano recounts how some real members of the Mafia model their style on that of fictional mobsters.

Mr. Berlusconi made his remarks at a news conference in the southern Italian city of Reggio Calabria, where his cabinet unveiled an ambitious 10-point plan for fighting organized crime. They chose the site to demonstrate the presence of the state in Calabria after the ’Ndrangheta, or Calabrian mafia, threatened bomb attacks in recent weeks against magistrates and the president of Italy.

This month, immigrant day laborers living in squalid conditions clashed with residents in Rosarno, a Calabrian town in the grip of the Mafia. Analysts are still debating whether organized crime groups set off the riots to force the immigrants to flee, or whether they helped quash the riots.

In his remarks, Mr. Berlusconi, whose coalition is dominated by the Northern League party, known for its harsh anti-immigrant stance, also praised Italy’s accomplishments in cracking down on illegal immigration.

“A reduction in the number of foreigners in Italy means fewer people to fill the ranks of organized crime,” he said.

Programming aside, the Berlusconi government has a conflicted record on organized crime. On Thursday, Interior Minister Roberto Maroni said the authorities had confiscated goods worth more than $9.78 billion from organized crime syndicates since 2008. The authorities have also made dozens of high-profile arrests in recent months, including the arrest in Spain last week of a boss in the Camorra.

But critics say other government measures have undermined those gains. Prosecutors vehemently oppose a bill proposed by Mr. Berlusconi’s center-right coalition that would significantly limit the scope of wiretapping, a technique prosecutors say is essential to investigating organized crime groups. Other critics argue that a measure passed last year that taxes repatriated assets at only 5 percent is a boon for money launderers.

On Thursday, Italy’s leading industrialists’ organization, Confindustria, said that businesses that failed to report extortion by organized crime groups would risk expulsion.

 Afghanistan’s president declared Thursday that reaching out to the Taliban’s leadership would be a centerpiece of his plan to end the eight-year-old war in his country, setting in motion a risky diplomatic gambit that could aggravate frictions with the United States.

A 65-nation conference here intended to muster money and support for an Afghan war strategy instead exposed divisions between the Afghan government and its allies over the timetable for drawing down foreign forces and whether and how to reconcile with the leaders of the Taliban insurgency.

“We must reach out to all of our countrymen, especially our disenchanted brothers,” President Hamid Karzai said. In the coming weeks, he said, he will invite Taliban leaders to a tribal assembly to try to persuade them to lay down their weapons and join the government.

Mr. Karzai’s proposal went much further than the strategy preferred by many American officials, who favor luring back low- and midlevel Taliban fighters. The Obama administration is in the middle of a spirited debate over the implications of negotiating with top Taliban leaders who sheltered Osama bin Laden and still have ties to Al Qaeda.

American officials pointedly did not talk about “reconciliation” on Thursday, and they were caught off guard by Mr. Karzai’s plans for a tribal peace conference. Secretary of State Hillary Rodham Clinton did not endorse Mr. Karzai’s strategy, though she voiced sympathy for his ultimate goal.

“You don’t make peace with your friends,” Mrs. Clinton said after the meeting, which reflected a growing urgency to wind down the West’s military involvement. “You have to be willing to engage with your enemies if you expect to create a situation that ends an insurgency.”

Still, the Afghan government’s ambitious plan to lure back the Taliban — foot soldiers and commanders — faces equally probing questions at home. Across Afghan society, there are grave doubts about how the Taliban could be brought into the fold.

Dangling jobs and money before the Taliban could breed resentment among other poor Afghans who have little to show for their loyalty to the government. And it could deepen ethnic divisions with minorities like the Tajiks and Hazaras, who fought the Taliban for 15 years. They may see the rewards as an unfair windfall for the Pashtuns, who make up most of the Taliban’s recruits.

Among former Taliban members who have taken part in previous government reconciliation programs, there is deep skepticism that a new program will be any better than earlier versions, which left them impoverished, jobless and at risk of being attacked by their former comrades.

“Everyone understands that this ‘reconciliation’ process is just a name because they leave us in the lurch,” said Mullah Abdul Majed, a former Taliban commander who laid down his weapons in 2008 only to find himself abandoned by the government he had hoped to join.

Mullah Majed’s story illustrates the pitfalls. After laying down their weapons, he and 12 of his fellow fighters were each given about $140 and promised housing. When they returned to their home province, Kandahar, they found no money, no housing, no jobs and no protection from Taliban reprisals.

“The Taliban are warning us that ‘If you remain loyal to the government, we will kill you,’ ” he said. “So we can’t go outside the city to work. Last year one of our friends was killed by Taliban, and one was injured.”

Mullah Majed and a friend, who also signed up for the previous reconciliation program, are on the verge of returning to the Taliban because they cannot find work to provide for their families, the mullah said.

This time, with the NATO forces backing the plan, it will be easier to ensure that the fighters are not arrested, Afghan officials said. “There has to be proper protection for them,” said Shaida Mohammed Abdali, the Afghan deputy national security adviser. “There has to be amnesty, a guarantee for them that once they are reconciled, they can have a life like all others.”

The London conference was intended to help cure some of those problems. It raised $140 million for a fund intended to ease the reintegration of Taliban fighters. Some $500 million was pledged in all, but it is unclear whether all that money will materialize.

Mrs. Clinton praised Japan for giving $50 million to the fund, but she said the United States had no immediate plans to follow. The Treasury Department would have to approve such financing, because it classifies the Taliban as a terrorist organization.

The Pentagon is authorized to use its funds for that purpose: American military commanders, for example, agreed to steer $1 million in development projects to a large Pashtun tribe in eastern Afghanistan in return for its pledge to back the government and battle the Taliban.

A senior American official said that Taliban members who took part in the peace conference should disavow ties to Al Qaeda, but whether top Taliban leaders can be persuaded to jettison their longtime Qaeda allies remains uncertain. Mr. Karzai laid down no such conditions, and the traditions governing such a meeting, known as a jirga, give him wide latitude about whom to invite.

For their part, the Taliban leaders have rejected talk of an olive branch, saying their fighters will not be influenced by financial inducements and will not join talks until foreign forces leave Afghanistan. American officials said that was evidence of the Taliban’s insecurity.

This week, the United Nations removed the names of five Taliban members from its blacklist — a move considered important because it would allow them to travel to take part in negotiations. Mr. Karzai said he wanted to see more names taken off the list.

He also asked for help from King Abdullah of Saudi Arabia, whose country has longstanding ties to elements of the Taliban, to help broker negotiations. And he appealed to Pakistan, where many Taliban leaders have sought haven in the rugged region bordering Afghanistan. Iran was invited to the meeting but did not attend.

While the differences over reconciling with the Taliban dominated the meeting, that was not the only divide. Even before it began, Mr. Karzai opened another chasm with his allies, once again raising the prospect of a far more drawn-out foreign troop presence before Afghans would be able to assume full responsibility for their own security.

It could take 5 to 10 years for Afghan forces to take over from the American-led coalition, he told the BBC in an interview, and even longer to end his country’s dependence on financial aid to sustain its military.

That is far longer than President Obama’s goal to begin drawing down American forces by the summer of 2011. Other Western leaders, too, have been pushing for a tighter timetable. Prime Minister Gordon Brown of Britain noted that targets had been set for the total Afghan Army and police strength to rise above 300,000 by October 2011. Allied commanders have said that could take three years or more.

Mark Landler reported from London, and Alissa J. Rubin from Kabul, Afghanistan. Taimoor Shah contributed reporting from Kandahar, Afghanistan.

More than two weeks after the earthquake that devastated much of this country’s southern half, the capital remains a city of teetering walls, dangling electrical wires and precariously balanced heaps of jagged cinder block and wrought iron, all rattled daily by aftershocks.

Bulldozers and excavators are few and far between. Even as tent cities here swell, aid groups say an estimated 10 percent of the city’s residents (a number that may be vastly understated) are camping in yards and streets next to their homes, marking off what they hope is a safe distance in case the structures fall in the next aftershock. Others trek by daily to see if their houses are still standing and wonder if they will ever be able to move back in.

“It’s dangerous, but what can we do?” Orpha Brinach, 38, said after a night on a mattress in a narrow street lined by damaged homes. “We can’t go to the tent cities because robbers will steal everything we have.”

Along the ravaged main commercial strip, vendors hawk goods as people claw their way into demolished stores in the shadow of wobbly buildings that appear ready to crumble at any moment. Low-flying military helicopters cruise overhead, spreading fear on the ground that the jarring rotors will give wounded buildings’ their final blow.

Government education officials and aid officials said Thursday that they hoped schools would begin reopening Monday, but it was unclear how many schools would be able to open — or how many students would be able to return.

John Henry Telemaque, assistant coordinator for education for President René Préval’s emergency disaster committee, said that perhaps up to 97 percent of the city’s schools — built to withstand hurricanes, not earthquakes — had been destroyed, and that the dead within were still being counted.

At the National Laboratory for Buildings and Public Works in Delmas, Raymond Hygin, assistant director of public works for engineering, pulled out a two-inch-thick stack of inspection documents for the 112 standing buildings that had been checked and ordered demolished. The number actually taken down: zero. “When we will begin to demolish, we couldn’t tell you,” he said. “First we have to continue our evaluation.”

The agency has six inspection teams and is working with outside groups, including a French-based nonprofit organization called Emergency Architects, to bring in more.

Mr. Hygin said the priorities were government buildings and structures that presented immediate hazards. Homes, he said, would have to wait. Structural engineers from the United States and other countries have already been evaluating government buildings and hospitals.

Mr. Hygin’s inspectors began work on Monday, delayed, he said, because many of them lost family members or their own homes in the earthquake.

In Delmas, the top two floors of a pastel yellow apartment building collapsed onto the two lower floors, crushing them, and now lean precariously over a busy road. A spray-painted sign reads “À démolir” (“demolish”), with the agency’s initials and a large X circled in red. In another part of the city, Pont Morin, cracks gape on a nine-story telecommunications building in a residential neighborhood that bears no sign of having been inspected.

With damage stretching into every section of the city, the task for inspectors seems endless. But Mr. Hygin set a target of three months. “It is optimistic, yes,” he said. “But we will try.”

The International Medical Corps, a California-based nonprofit organization that is running the general hospital here, said it had not seen injuries related to new collapses. But a spokesman for the organization said a team from another group, the Brooklyn-based Bedford-Stuyvesant Volunteer Ambulance Corps, reported recovering the bodies of four people on Tuesday — some of them children — who were crushed in the collapse of a four-story building after an aftershock.

“It was a pretty dramatic story, because the rescuers could hear kids crying and banging,” said the spokesman, Tyler Marshall. “They apparently died during the attempt to remove the rubble.”

The capital’s electrical system is also a work in progress. Col. Rick Kaiser of the United States Army commands an engineering brigade for the military’s Joint Task Force Haiti, which has been helping restore vital infrastructure. He told reporters this week that restoration of power could still be a few weeks away.

The slow clearing of rubble, meanwhile, is setting off a new round of mourning for many families and the appearance of bodies on the street. This week, men working to clear debris from a hardware store found the body of a young child, missing a leg and an arm and wearing only green shorts, by a nearby telephone pole. The men said they did not know where the body came from. One started crying, a rare release in a city grimly stoic about the overwhelming loss of life.

But on Wednesday, there were more tears. As government and aid workers cleared rubble from the collapsed Ministry of Education, the building’s caretaker was found. The work ID in his pocket said Benjamin Sius. Family members who came to collect the body wailed on the street outside. A sister, Elsia Sius, said he supported the whole family and paid for school for her three children.

“I’ve lost my brother,” Ms. Sius mourned. “I have nothing left.”

Rescued Girl Stable

PORT-AU-PRINCE, Haiti (AP) — A 16-year-old girl pulled from the rubble more than two weeks after a deadly earthquake was in stable condition on Thursday, able to eat yogurt and mashed vegetables. Doctors said her survival was medically inexplicable.

The girl, Darlene Etienne, was rescued a day earlier from a collapsed home and was being treated on the French Navy hospital ship Sirocco, anchored off Port-au-Prince. Her doctor, Evelyne Lambert, said she had a 90 percent chance of survival.

She may have had some access to water from a bathroom of the wrecked house, and rescuers said she mumbled something about having a little Coca-Cola with her in the rubble.

Ruth Fremson contributed reporting from Port-au-Prince, and Jack Healy from New York.

Like almost anyone from Hispaniola, the island uncomfortably shared by Haiti and the Dominican Republic, Paloma Rivera is acutely aware that the two nations distrust each other, complain about each other and cite grievances about each other going back well over a century.

Yet here she was, a Dominican, clearing garbage and digging latrines in a slum in the Haitian capital, Port-au-Prince, to help survivors of the earthquake find a place to pitch their tents.

“Maybe this earthquake, even with its tragedies, can do some good by making us a little less distant from each other,” said Ms. Rivera, 24, a social worker who joined thousands of other Dominicans in loading emergency food and medicine into their vehicles and driving here.

Since the earthquake ravaged this city on Jan. 12, a dizzying array of soldiers, doctors, aid workers and missionaries have massed here from around the globe, communicating in Arabic, Hebrew, Mandarin and many other tongues.

Most of the time, their politics back home have taken a back seat, making for some strange bedfellows working in close proximity, if not exactly side by side: Israelis and Libyans, Pakistanis and Indians, all trying to get this country back on its feet.

In other cases, the earthquake seems to be highlighting conflicts among Haiti’s allies. Venezuela and Cuba, jockeying for influence, have criticized the United States, which has long been a major influence here, for its heavy use of soldiers in its humanitarian aid effort.

“It’s worrisome that the United States is using this tragedy to militarily occupy Haiti,” President Hugo Chávez of Venezuela said last week during a visit to Bolivia for the inauguration of President Evo Morales. Mr. Morales, a top recipient of Venezuelan aid, described the Obama administration’s decision to send troops to Haiti as “an invasion.”

Taiwan, meanwhile, has been using its close ties with Haiti to fend off the entreaties of the Chinese government, which has been trying to win over Haiti’s president, René Préval, and convince him that his country should no longer recognize Taiwan as an independent nation.

But among all the various political relationships thrown into flux, the possible metamorphosis of Haiti’s ties with the Dominican Republic stands out.

Before the earthquake, Haiti’s political class viewed its neighbor to the east with extreme suspicion. The harsh treatment of Haitian immigrants by the Dominican Republic and lingering animus over a massacre of tens of thousands of Haitian laborers ordered in 1937 by the Dominican dictator Rafael Trujillo fuel the resentment, along with a dose of envy over the relative prosperity of Haiti’s next-door neighbor.

Some in the Dominican political establishment, in turn, had long gazed at Haiti with resentment over Haiti’s two-decade annexation of the former Spanish colony of Santo Domingo in the 1800s. And in recent decades, the Dominican government focused on averting a major influx of Haitian immigrants, while relying on cheap Haitian labor for construction and to cut sugar cane.

It would be impossible to erase all this resentment in just two weeks. But the thousands of Dominicans helping the victims here may have begun chiseling away at the divisions between the 18.6 million people almost evenly distributed across the two nations.

“Our relations with Haiti will never be the same,” Pastor Vásquez, 42, a senior diplomat at the Dominican Embassy, said outside the damaged embassy building, where dozens of volunteers were staying in tents.

Mr. Vásquez said the Dominican Republic had waived visa restrictions for Haitians seeking emergency medical care, authorized nearly 300 flights carrying aid and donated $11 million. One of the Dominican Republic’s most prosperous corporate families, Grupo Vicini, which has been accused of exploiting Haitian workers on sugar cane plantations in the past, has also donated millions of dollars for the recovery.

While other immigration restrictions at the main border crossing remain, the countries are warily growing closer in other ways. After the earthquake, Haiti’s leaders at first resisted the idea of accepting Dominican troops to work with the United Nations force here, but then changed their minds.

The decision has not been easy for the Dominican Republic either. President Leonel Fernández’s proposal to send more than 100 troops to Haiti set off a debate over what would happen if the soldiers encountered violence, with some of Mr. Fernández’s opponents saying that the proposal should be subjected to congressional approval.

Political analysts also point out that the assistance is not purely altruistic. For starters, the Dominican Republic is concerned about an exodus of Haitians across the border, so it is in the its own interest to stabilize Haiti.

Another interest is economic, analysts say.

“The Dominican Republic may have the most to gain in the immediate future from reconstruction efforts,” said Johanna Mendelson Forman, a senior associate at the Center for Strategic and International Studies in Washington. “Its firms are poised to help with building equipment, and it has investors who have shown an interest in helping to create infrastructure,” she said in a research paper.

But the work of the Dominican volunteers points to other, more idealistic motivations. Each day, they distribute food in the slum known as Delmas 54 and work on a census of the homeless. They even called the displaced-persons camp they helped create Quisqueya, a word used in both countries to refer to the indigenous origins of Hispaniola.

Elisabeth Delatour Préval, Haiti’s first lady, said that when she was finally able to sign on to her computer after the earthquake, one of the first messages she received was from her Dominican counterpart, Margarita Cedeño de Fernández.

“She asked me how she could help,” Mrs. Préval said, noting that their husbands had been in frequent communication since the earthquake as well.

As Lorraine Mangonès, a Haitian community activist, put it, “I guess they didn’t hate us as much as we thought.”