




INSCRIPTION.

  SMALL 
is the theme of the following Chant, yet the 
  greatest&#8212;namely, 
ONE'S-SELF&#8212;that wondrous  
  thing, a simple, separate person. That, for the  
  use of the New World, I sing.


  Man's physiology complete, from top to toe, I sing. Not  
  physiognomy alone, nor brain alone, is worthy for  
  the muse;&#8212;I say the Form complete is worthier  
  far. The female equally with the male, I sing.

  Nor cease at the theme of One's-Self. I speak the word  
  of the modern, the word 
EN-MASSE.

  My Days I sing, and the Lands&#8212;with interstice I knew 
  of hapless War.

  O friend, whoe'er you are, at last arriving hither to com- 
  mence, I feel through every leaf the pressure of 
  your hand, which I return. And thus upon our 
  journey link'd together let us go.











STARTING FROM PAUMANOK.

1

              STARTING from fish-shape Paumanok, where I was 
  born,

Well-begotten, and rais'd by a perfect mother;

  After roaming many lands&#8212;lover of populous pave-
  ments; 


  Dweller in Mannahatta, city of ships, my city&#8212;or on 
  southern savannas; 


  Or a soldier camp'd, or carrying my knapsack and gun 
  &#8212;or a miner in California; 


  Or rude in my home in Dakotah's woods, my diet 
  meat, my drink from the spring; 


  Or withdrawn to muse and meditate in some deep 
  recess,


  Far from the clank of crowds, intervals passing, rapt 
  and happy; 


  Aware of the fresh free giver, the flowing Missouri&#8212; 
  aware of mighty Niagara; 


  Aware of the buffalo herds, grazing the plains&#8212;the 
  hirsute and strong-breasted bull; 


  Of earths, rocks, Fifth-month flowers, experienced&#8212; 
  stars, rain, snow, my amaze; 


  Having studied the mocking-bird's tones, and the 
  mountain hawk's,


  And heard at dusk the unrival'd one, the hermit 
  thrush from the swamp-cedars,


  Solitary, singing in the West, I strike up for a New 
  World.







2

Victory, union, faith, identity, time,

  Yourself, the present and future lands, the indissolu-
  ble compacts, riches, mystery,

Eternal progress, the kosmos, and the modern reports.


This, then, is life;

  Here is what has come to the surface after so many 
  throes and convulsions.



How curious! how real!
Under foot the divine soil&#8212;over head the sun.


See, revolving, the globe;
The ancestor-continents, away, group'd together;

  The present and future continents, north and south,
  with the isthmus between.



See, vast, trackless spaces;
As in a dream, they change, they swiftly fill;
Countless masses debouch upon them;

  They are now cover'd with the foremost people, arts,
  institutions, known.



See, projected, through time,
For me, an audience interminable.



  With firm and regular step they wend&#8212;they never 
  stop,

Successions of men, Americanos, a hundred millions;
One generation playing its part, and passing on,

  Another generation playing its part, and passing on in 
  its turn,


  With faces turn'd sideways or backward towards me,
  to listen,

With eyes retrospective towards me.






3

Americanos! Conquerors! marches humanitarian;
Foremost! century marches! Libertad! masses!
For you a programme of chants.


Chants of the prairies;

  Chants of the long-running Mississippi, and down to 
  the Mexican sea; 


  Chants of Ohio, Indiana, Illinois, Iowa, Wisconsin and 
  Minnesota; 


  Chants going forth from the centre, from Kansas, and 
  thence, equi-distant,

Shooting in pulses of fire, ceaseless, to vivify all.



4

In the Year 80 of The States,

  My tongue, every atom of my blood, form'd from this 
  soil, this air,


  Born here of parents born here, from parents the same,
  and their parents the same,

I, now thirty-six years old, in perfect health, begin,
Hoping to cease not till death.


Creeds and schools in abeyance,

  (Retiring back a while, sufficed at what they are, but 
  never forgotten,)


  I harbor, for good or bad&#8212;I permit to speak, at every 
  hazard,

Nature now without check, with original energy.



5


  Take my leaves, America! take them South, and 
  take them North!


  Make welcome for them everywhere, for they are your 
  own offspring; 


  Surround them, East and West! for they would sur-
  round you; 


  And you precedents! connect lovingly with them, for 
  they connect lovingly with you.






I conn'd old times;
I sat studying at the feet of the great masters:

  Now, if eligible, O that the great masters might re-
  turn and study me!




  In the name of These States, shall I scorn the 
  antique?


  Why these are the children of the antique, to jus-
  tify it.




6

Dead poets, philosophs, priests,
Martyrs, artists, inventors, governments long since,
Language-shapers, on other shores,

  Nations once powerful, now reduced, withdrawn, or 
  desolate,


  I dare not proceed till I respectfully credit what you 
  have left, wafted hither : 


  I have perused it&#8212;own it is admirable, (moving 
  awhile among it;)


  Think nothing can ever be greater&#8212;nothing can ever 
  deserve more than it deserves; 


  Regarding it all intently a long while, then dismiss-
  ing it,

I stand in my place, with my own day, here.


Here lands female and male;

  Here the heirship and heiress-ship of the world&#8212;here 
  the flame of materials; 

Here Spirituality, the translatress, the openly-avow'd,
The ever-tending, the finale of visible forms;
The satisfier, after due long-waiting, now advancing,
Yes, here comes my mistress, the Soul.



7

The SOUL!

  Forever and forever&#8212;longer than soil is brown and 
  solid&#8212;longer than water ebbs and flows.







  I will make the poems of materials, for I think they 
  are to be the most spiritual poems; 


  And I will make the poems of my body and of mor-
  tality,


  For I think I shall then supply myself with the poems 
  of my Soul, and of immortality.




  I will make a song for These States, that no one 
  State may under any circumstances be sub-
  jected to another State; 


  And I will make a song that there shall be comity by 
  day and by night between all The States, and 
  between any two of them; 


  And I will make a song for the ears of the President,
  full of weapons with menacing points,

And behind the weapons countless dissatisfied faces :
And a song make I, of the One form'd out of all;
The fang'd and glittering One whose head is over all;
Resolute, warlike One, including and over all;

  (However high the head of any else, that head is over all.)



I will acknowledge contemporary lands;

  I will trail the whole geography of the globe, and sa-
  lute courteously every city large and small; 


  And employments! I will put in my poems, that with 
  you is heroism, upon land and sea&#8212;And I will 
  report all heroism from an American point of 
  view; 


  And sexual organs and acts! do you concentrate in 
  me&#8212;for I am determin'd to tell you with cour-
  ageous clear voice, to prove you illustrious.



I will sing the song of companionship;
I will show what alone must finally compact These;

  I believe These are to found their own ideal of 
  manly love, indicating it in me; 


  I will therefore let flame from me the burning fires 
  that were threatening to consume me; 





  I will lift what has too long kept down those smoul-
  dering fires; 

I will give them complete abandonment;
I will write the evangel-poem of comrades and of
love;
(For who but I should understand love, with all its
sorrow and joy?
And who but I should be the poet of comrades?)



8

I am the credulous man of qualities, ages, races;

  I advance from the people en-masse in their own 
  spirit; 

Here is what sings unrestricted faith.


Omnes! Omnes! let others ignore what they may;

  I make the poem of evil also&#8212;I commemorate that 
  part also; 


  I am myself just as much evil as good, and my nation 
  is&#8212;And I say there is in fact no evil,


  (Or if there is, I say it is just as important to you, to 
  the land, or to me, as anything else.)




  I too, following many, and follow'd by many, inau-
  gurate a Religion&#8212;I too go to the wars; 


  (It may be I am destin'd to utter the loudest cries 
  thereof, the winner's pealing shouts; 


  Who knows? they may rise from me yet, and soar 
  above every thing.)



Each is not for its own sake;

  I say the whole earth, and all the stars in the sky, are 
  for Religion's sake.



I say no man has ever yet been half devout enough
None has ever yet adored or worship'd half enough;




  None has begun to think how divine he himself is, and 
  how certain the future is.




  I say that the real and permanent grandeur of 
  These States must be their religion; 

Otherwise there is no real and permanent grandeur;

  (Nor character, nor life worthy the name, without Re-
  ligion; 

Nor land, nor man or woman, without Religion.)



9

What are you doing, young man?

  Are you so earnest&#8212;so given up to literature, science,
  art, amours?

These ostensible realities, politics, points?
Your ambition or business, whatever it may be?



  It is well&#8212;Against such I say not a word&#8212;I am 
  their poet also; 


  But behold! such swiftly subside&#8212;burnt up for Re-
  ligion's sake; 


  For not all matter is fuel to heat, impalpable flame,
  the essential life of the earth,

Any more than such are to Religion.



10

What do you seek, so pensive and silent?
What do you need, Camerado?
Dear son! do you think it is love?


Listen, dear son&#8212;listen, America, daughter or son!

  It is a painful thing to love a man or woman to ex-
  cess&#8212;and yet it satisfies&#8212;it is great; 


  But there is something else very great&#8212;it makes the 
  whole coincide; 


  It, magnificent, beyond materials, with continuous 
  hands, sweeps and provides for all.







11


  Know you! to drop in the earth the germs of a 
  greater Religion,

The following chants, each for its kind, I sing.


My comrade!

  For you, to share with me, two greatnesses&#8212;and a 
  third one, rising inclusive and more resplen-
  dent,


  The greatness of Love and Democracy&#8212;and the 
  greatness of Religion.



Melange mine own! the unseen and the seen;
Mysterious ocean where the streams empty;

  Prophetic spirit of materials shifting and flickering 
  around me; 

Living beings, identities, now doubtless near us, in
the air, that we know not of;
Contact daily and hourly that will not release me;
These selecting&#8212;these, in hints, demanded of me.



  Not he, with a daily kiss, onward from childhood 
  kissing me,


  Has winded and twisted around me that which holds 
  me to him,


  Any more than I am held to the heavens, to the spir-
  itual world,


  And to the identities of the Gods, my lovers, faithful 
  and true,

After what they have done to me, suggesting themes.


O such themes! Equalities!
O amazement of things! O divine average!

  O warblings under the sun&#8212;usher'd, as now, or at 
  noon, or setting!


  O strain, musical, flowing through ages&#8212;now reach-
  ing hither,


  I take to your reckless and composite chords&#8212;I add 
  to them, and cheerfully pass them forward.







12

As I have walk'd in Alabama my morning walk,

  I have seen where the she-bird, the mocking-bird 
  on her nest in the briers, hatching her brood.



I have seen the he-bird also;

  I have paused to hear him, near at hand, inflating his 
  throat, and joyfully singing.




  And while I paused, it came to me that what he 
  really sang for was not there only,


  Nor for his mate nor himself only, nor all sent back 
  by the echoes; 

But subtle, clandestine, away beyond,

  A charge transmitted, and gift occult, for those being 
  born.




13

Democracy!
Near at hand to you a throat is now inflating itself
and joyfully singing.


Ma femme!
For the brood beyond us and of us,
For those who belong here, and those to come,

  I, exultant, to be ready for them, will now shake out 
  carols stronger and haughtier than have ever 
  yet been heard upon earth.




  I will make the songs of passion, to give them their 
  way,


  And your songs, outlaw'd offenders&#8212;for I scan you 
  with kindred eyes, and carry you with me the 
  same as any.



I will make the true poem of riches,

  To earn for the body and the mind, whatever adheres,
  and goes forward, and is not dropt by death.







  I will effuse egotism, and show it underlying all&#8212; 
  and I will be the bard of personality; 


  And I will show of male and female that either is but 
  the equal of the other; 


  And I will show that there is no imperfection in the 
  present&#8212;and can be none in the future; 


  And I will show that whatever happens to anybody, it 
  may be turn'd to beautiful results&#8212;and I will 
  show that nothing can happen more beautiful 
  than death; 


  And I will thread a thread through my poems that 
  time and events are compact,


  And that all the things of the universe are perfect 
  miracles, each as profound as any.



I will not make poems with reference to parts;

  But I will make leaves, poems, poemets, songs, says,
  thoughts, with reference to ensemble: 


  And I will not sing with reference to a day, but with 
  reference to all days; 


  And I will not make a poem, nor the least part of a 
  poem, but has reference to the Soul; 


  (Because, having look'd at the objects of the universe,
  I find there is no one, nor any particle of one,
  but has reference to the Soul.)




14

Was somebody asking to see the Soul?

  See! your own shape and countenance&#8212;persons, sub-
  stances, beasts, the trees, the running rivers, the 
  rocks and sands. All hold spiritual joys, and afterwards loosen them: 

How can the real body ever die, and be buried?



  Of your real body, and any man's or woman's real 
  body,


  Item for item, it will elude the hands of the corpse-
  cleaners, and pass to fitting spheres,





  Carrying what has accrued to it from the moment of 
  birth to the moment of death.




  Not the types set up by the printer return their im-
  pression, the meaning, the main concern,


  Any more than a man's substance and life, or a wo-
  man's substance and life, return in the body 
  and the Soul,

Indifferently before death and after death.



  Behold! the body includes and is the meaning, the 
  main concern&#8212;and includes and is the Soul; 


  Whoever you are! how superb and how divine is your 
  body, or any part of it.




15

Whoever you are! to you endless announcements.


Daughter of the lands, did you wait for your poet?

  Did you wait for one with a flowing mouth and in-
  dicative hand?




  Toward the male of The States, and toward the 
  female of The States,

Live words&#8212;words to the lands.


O the lands! interlink'd, food-yielding lands!

  Land of coal and iron! Land of gold! Lands of 
  cotton, sugar, rice!


  Land of wheat, beef, pork! Land of wool and hemp!
  Land of the apple and grape!


  Land of the pastoral plains, the grass-fields of the 
  world! Land of those sweet-air'd interminable 
  plateaus!


  Land of the herd, the garden, the healthy house of 
  adobie!


  Lands where the northwest Columbia winds, and 
  where the southwest Colorado winds!





  Land of the eastern Chesapeake! Land of the Dela-
  ware!

Land of Ontario, Erie, Huron, Michigan!

  Land of the Old Thirteen! Massachusetts land! Land 
  of Vermont and Connecticut!

Land of the ocean shores! Land of sierras and peaks!
Land of boatmen and sailors! Fishermen's land!

  Inextricable lands! the clutch'd together! the passion-
  ate ones!


  The side by side! the elder and younger brothers!
  the bony-limb'd!


  The great women's land! the feminine! the ex-
  perienced sisters and the inexperienced sisters!


  Far breath'd land! Arctic braced! Mexican breez'd!
  the diverse! the compact!


  The Pennsylvanian! the Virginian! the double Caro-
  linian!


  O all and each well-loved by me! my intrepid nations!
  O I at any rate include you all with perfect love!


  I cannot be discharged from you! not from one, any 
  sooner than another!


  O Death! O for all that, I am yet of you, unseen, this 
  hour, with irrepressible love,

Walking New England, a friend, a traveler,

  Splashing my bare feet in the edge of the summer 
  ripples, on Paumanok's sands,


  Crossing the prairies&#8212;dwelling again in Chicago&#8212; 
  dwelling in every town,


  Observing shows, births, improvements, structures,
  arts,


  Listening to the orators and the oratresses in public 
  halls,


  Of and through The States, as during life&#8212;each man 
  and woman my neighbor,


  The Louisianian, the Georgian, as near to me, and I 
  as near to him and her,


  The Mississippian and Arkansian yet with me&#8212;and 
   I yet with any of them; 





  Yet upon the plains west of the spinal river&#8212;yet in 
  my house of adobie,


  Yet returning eastward&#8212;yet in the Sea-Side State, or 
  in Maryland,


  Yet Kanadian, cheerily braving the winter&#8212;the snow 
  and ice welcome to me,


  Yet a true son either of Maine, or of the Granite State,
  or of the Narragansett Bay State, or of the 
  Empire State; 


  Yet sailing to other shores to annex the same&#8212;yet 
  welcoming every new brother; 


  Hereby applying these leaves to the new ones, from 
  the hour they unite with the old ones; 


  Coming among the new ones myself, to be their com-
  panion and equal&#8212;coming personally to you 
  now; 


  Enjoining you to acts, characters, spectacles, with 
  me.






16

With me, with firm holding&#8212;yet haste, haste on.


For your life, adhere tome;

  Of all the men of the earth, I only can unloose you 
  and toughen you; 


  I may have to be persuaded many times before I 
  consent to give myself to you&#8212;but what of 
  that?

Must not Nature be persuaded many times?


No dainty dolce affettuoso I;

  Bearded, sunburnt, gray-neck'd, forbidding, I have 
  arrived,


  To be wrestled with as I pass, for the solid prizes of 
  the universe; 

For such I afford whoever can persevere to win them.






17

On my way a moment I pause;
Here for you! and here for America!

  Still the Present I raise aloft&#8212;Still the Future of 
  The States I harbinge, glad and sublime; 


  And for the Past, I pronounce what the air holds of 
  &amp; 



The red aborigines!

  Leaving natural breaths, sounds of rain and winds,
  calls as of birds and animals in the woods,
  syllabled to us for names; 


  Okonee, Koosa, Ottawa, Monongahela, Sauk, Natchez,
  Chattahoochee, Kaqueta, Oronoco,


  Wabash, Miami, Saginaw, Chippewa, Oshkosh, Walla-
  Walla; 


  Leaving such to The States, they melt, they depart,
  charging the water and the land with names.




18

O expanding and swift! O henceforth,

  Elements, breeds, adjustments, turbulent, quick, and 
  audacious; 


  A world primal again&#8212;Vistas of glory, incessant and 
  branching; 


  A new race, dominating previous ones, and grander 
  far, with new contests,


  New politics, new literatures and religions, new in-
  ventions and arts.




  These! my voice announcing&#8212;I will sleep no more,
  but arise; 


  You oceans that have been calm within me! how I 
  feel you, fathomless, stirring, preparing un-
  precedented waves and storms.







19

See! steamers steaming through my poems!

  See, in my poems immigrants continually coming and 
  landing; 


  See, in arriere, the wigwam, the trail, the hunter's 
  hut, the flat-boat, the maize-leaf, the claim, the 
  rude fence, and the backwoods village; 


  See, on the one side the Western Sea, and on the 
  other the Eastern Sea, how they advance and 
  retreat upon my poems, as upon their own 
  shores; 


  See, pastures and forests in my poems&#8212;See, animals,
  wild and tame&#8212;See, beyond the Kanzas, count-
  less herds of buffalo, feeding on short curly 
  grass; 


  See, in my poems, cities, solid, vast, inland, with 
  paved streets, with iron and stone edifices,
  ceaseless vehicles, and commerce; 


  See, the many press&#8212;See,
  the electric telegraph, stretching across the 
  Continent, from the Western Sea to Man-
  hattan; 


  See, through Atlantica's depths, pulses American,
  Europe reaching&#8212;pulses of Europe, duly re-
  turn'd; 


  See, the strong and quick locomotive, as it departs,
  panting, blowing the steam-whistle; 


  See, ploughmen, ploughing farms&#8212;See, miners, dig-
  ging mines&#8212;See, the numberless factories; 


  See, mechanics, busy at their benches, with tools&#8212; 
  See from among them, superior judges, philo-
  sophs, Presidents, emerge, drest in working 
  dresses; 


  See, lounging through the shops and fields of The 
  States, me, well-beloved, close-held by day and 
  night; 


  Hear the loud echoes of my songs there! Read the 
  hints come at last.







20

O Camerado close!
O you and me at last&#8212;and us two only.


O a word to clear one's path ahead endlessly!

  O something extatic and undemonstrable! O music 
  wild!

O now I triumph&#8212;and you shall also;

  O hand in hand&#8212;O wholesome pleasure&#8212;O one more 
  desirer and lover!

O to haste, firm holding&#8212;to haste, haste on, with me.








WALT WHITMAN.

1

              I CELEBRATE myself;
And what I assume you shall assume;

  For every atom belonging to me, as good belongs to 
  you.



I loafe and invite my Soul;

  I lean and loafe at my ease, observing a spear of sum-
  mer grass.




  Houses and rooms are full of perfumes&#8212;the shelves 
  are crowded with perfumes; 

I breathe the fragrance myself, and know it and like it;

  The distillation would intoxicate me also, but I shall 
  not let it.




  The atmosphere is not a perfume&#8212;it has no taste of 
  the distillation&#8212;it is odorless; 

It is for my mouth forever&#8212;I am in love with it;

  I will go to the bank by the wood, and become undis-
  guised and naked; 

I am mad for it to be in contact with me.



2

The smoke of my own breath;

  Echoes, ripples, buzz'd whispers, love-root, silk-thread,
  crotch and vine; 


  My respiration and inspiration, the beating of my 
  heart, the passing of blood and air through my 
  lungs; 




  The sniff of green leaves and dry leaves, and of the 
  shore, and dark-color'd sea-rocks, and of hay in 
  the barn; 


  The sound of the belch'd words of my voice, words 
  loos'd to the eddies of the wind; 


  A few light kisses, a few embraces, a reaching around 
  of arms; 


  The play of shine and shade on the trees as the supple 
  boughs wag; 


  The delight alone, or in the rush of the streets, or 
  along the fields and hill-sides; 


  The feeling of health, the full noon trill, the song of 
  me rising from bed and meeting the sun.




  Have you reckon'd a thousand acres much? have you 
  reckon'd the earth much?

Have you practis'd so long to learn to read?

  Have you felt so proud to get at the meaning of 
  poems?




  Stop this day and night with me, and you shall pos-
  sess the origin of all poems; 


  You shall possess the good of the earth and sun&#8212; 
  (there are millions of suns left;)


  You shall no longer take things at second or third 
  hand, nor look through the eyes of the dead,
  nor feed on the spectres in books; 


  You shall not look through my eyes either, nor take 
  things from me: 


  You shall listen to all sides, and filter them from your-
  self.




3


  I have heard what the talkers were talking, the talk 
  of the beginning and the end.

But I do not talk of the beginning or the end.



  There was never any more inception than there is 
  now,

Nor any more youth or age than there is now;




  And will never be any more perfection than there 
  is now,

Nor any more heaven or hell than there is now.


Urge, and urge, and urge;
Always the procreant urge of the world.



  Out of the dimness opposite equals advance&#8212;always 
  substance and increase, always sex; 


  Always a knit of identity&#8212;always distinction&#8212;always 
  a breed of life.




  To elaborate is no avail&#8212;learn'd and unlearn'd feel 
  that it is so.




   Sure as the most certain sure, plumb in the uprights,
  well entretied, braced in the beams,

Stout as a horse, affectionate, haughty, electrical,
I and this mystery, here we stand.



  Clear and sweet is my Soul, and clear and sweet is 
  all that is not my Soul.




  Lack one lacks both, and the unseen is proved by 
  the seen,


  Till that becomes unseen, and receives proof in its 
  turn.




  Showing the best, and dividing it from the worst,
  age vexes age; 


  Knowing the perfect fitness and equanimity of things,
  while they discuss I am silent, and go bathe and 
  admire myself.




  Welcome is every organ and attribute of me, and of 
  any man hearty and clean; 


  Not an inch, nor a particle of an inch, is vile, and 
  none shall be less familiar than the rest.






I am satisfied&#8212;I see, dance, laugh, sing;

  As the hugging and loving Bed-fellow sleeps at my 
  side through the night, and withdraws at the 
  peep of the day, with stealthy tread,


  Leaving me baskets cover'd with white towels, swell-
  ing the house with their plenty,


  Shall I postpone my acceptation and realization, and 
  scream at my eyes,

That they turn from gazing after and down the road,
And forthwith cipher and show me a cent,

  Exactly the contents of one, and exactly the contents 
  of two, and which is ahead?




4

Trippers and askers surround me;

  People I meet&#8212;the effect upon me of my early life, or 
  the ward and city I live in, or the nation,


  The latest dates, discoveries, inventions, societies,
  authors old and new,

My dinner, dress, associates, looks, compliments, dues,

  The real or fancied indifference of some man or woman 
  I love,


  The sickness of one of my folks, or of myself, or ill-
  doing, or loss or lack of money, or depressions 
  or exaltations; 


  Battles, the horrors of fratricidal war, the fever of 
  doubtful news, the fitful events; 


  These come to me days and nights, and go from me 
  again,

But they are not the Me myself.



  Apart from the pulling and hauling stands what I 
  am; 


  Stands amused, complacent, compassionating, idle,
  unitary; 


  Looks down, is erect, or bends an arm on an impalpa-
  ble certain rest,





  Looking with side-curved head, curious what will come 
  next; 


  Both in and out of the game, and watching and won-
  dering at it.




  Backward I see in my own days where I sweated 
  through fog with linguists and contenders; 

I have no mockings or arguments&#8212;I witness and wait.



5


  I believe in you, my Soul&#8212;the other I am must 
  not abase itself to you; 

And you must not be abased to the other.



  Loafe with me on the grass&#8212;loose the stop from 
  your throat; 


  Not words, not music or rhyme I want&#8212;not custom or 
  lecture, not even the best; 

Only the lull I like, the hum of your valved voice.



  I mind how once we lay, such a transparent sum-
  mer morning; 


  How you settled your head athwart my hips, and gently 
  turn'd over upon me,


  And parted the shirt from my bosom-bone, and plunged 
  your tongue to my bare-stript heart,


  And reach'd till you felt my beard, and reach'd till you 
  held my feet.




  Swiftly arose and spread around me the peace and 
  knowledge that pass all the argument of the 
  earth; 


  And I know that the hand of God is the promise of my 
  own; 


  And I know that the spirit of God is the brother of 
  my own; 


  And that all the men ever born are also my brothers,
  and the women my sisters and lovers; 

And that a kelson of the creation is love;



And limitless are leaves, stiff or drooping in the fields;
And brown ants in the little wells beneath them;

  And mossy scabs of the worm-fence, and heap'd stones,
  elder, mullen and pokeweed.




6


  A child said, What is the grass? fetching it to me with 
  full hands; 


  How could I answer the child? I do not know what 
  it is, any more than he.




  I guess it must be the flag of my disposition, out of 
  hopeful green stuff woven.



Or I guess it is the handkerchief of the Lord,
A scented gift and remembrancer, designedly dropt,

  Bearing the owner's name someway in the corners,
  that we may see and remark, and say, Whose? 




  Or I guess the grass is itself a child, the produced 
  babe of the vegetation.



Or I guess it is a uniform hieroglyphic;

  And it means, Sprouting alike in broad zones and 
  narrow zones.

Growing among black folks as among white;

  Kanuck, Tuckahoe, Congressman, Cuff, I give them 
  the same, I receive them the same.




  And now it seems to me the beautiful uncut hair of 
  graves.



Tenderly will I use you,curling grass;

  It may be you transpire from the breasts of young 
  men; 


  It may be if I had known them I would have loved 
  them.





  It may be you are from old people, and from women,
  and from offspring taken soon out of their 
  mothers' laps; 

And here you are the mothers' laps.



  This grass is very dark to be from the white heads 
  of old mothers; 

Darker than the colorless beards of old men;

  Dark to come from under the faint red roofs of 
  mouths.



O I perceive after all so many uttering tongues!

  And I perceive they do not come from the roofs of 
  mouths for nothing.




  I wish I could translate the hints about the dead 
  young men and women,


  And the hints about old men and mothers, and the 
  offspring taken soon out of their laps.




  What do you think has become of the young and 
  old men?


  And what do you think has become of the women and 
  children?



They are alive and well somewhere;
The smallest sprout shows there is really no death;

  And if ever there was, it led forward life, and does 
  not wait at the end to arrest it,

And ceas'd the moment life appear'd.


All goes onward and outward&#8212;nothing collapses;

  And to die is different from what any one supposed,
  and luckier.







7

Has any one supposed it lucky to be born?

  I hasten to inform him or her, it is just as lucky to 
  die, and I know it.




  I pass death with the dying, and birth with the new 
  wash'd babe, and am not contain'd between my-
  hat and boots; 


  And peruse manifold objects, no two alike, and every 
  one good; 


  The earth good, and the stars good, and their 
  adjuncts all good.



I am not an earth, nor an adjunct of an earth;

  I am the mate and companion of people, all just as 
  immortal and fathomless as myself; 

(They do not know how immortal, but I know.)



  Every kind for itself and its own&#8212;for me mine, male 
  and female; 


  For me those that have been boys, and that love 
  women; 


  For me the man that is proud, and feels how it stings 
  to be slighted; 


  For me the sweetheart and the old maid&#8212;for me 
  mothers, and the mothers of mothers; 


  For me lips that have smiled, eyes that have shed 
  tears; 

For me children, and the begetters of children.



  Undrape! you are not guilty to me, nor stale, nor 
  discarded; 


  I see through the broadcloth and gingham, whether 
  or no; 


  And am around, tenacious, acquisitive, tireless, and 
  cannot be shaken away.







8

The little one sleeps in its cradle;

  I lift the gauze, and look a long time, and silently 
  brush away flies with my hand.




  The youngster and the red-faced girl turn aside up 
  the bushy hill; 

I peeringly view them from the top.



  The suicide sprawls on the bloody floor of the 
  bedroom; 


  I witness the corpse with its dabbled hair&#8212;I note 
  where the pistol has fallen.




  The blab of the pave, the tires of carts, sluff of 
  boot-soles, talk of the promenaders; 


  The heavy omnibus, the driver with his interrogating 
  thumb, the clank of the shod horses on the 
  granite floor; 


  The snow-sleighs, the clinking, shouted jokes, pelts of 
  snow-balls; 


  The hurrahs for popular favorites, the fury of rous'd 
  mobs; 


  The flap of the curtain'd litter, a sick man inside,
  borne to the hospital; 


  The meeting of enemies, the sudden oath, the blows 
  and fall; 


  The excited crowd, the policeman with his star,
  quickly working his passage to the centre of 
  the crowd; 


  The impassive stones that receive and return so many 
  echoes; 


  What groans of over-fed or half-starv'd who fall 
  sun-struck, or in fits; 


  What exclamations of women taken suddenly, who 
  hurry home and give birth to babes; 


  What living and buried speech is always vibrating here 
  &#8212;what howls restrain'd by decorum,





   Arrests of criminals, slights, adulterous offers made,
  acceptances, rejections with convex lips; 


  I mind them or the show or resonance of them&#8212;I 
  come, and I depart.
   



9


  The big doors of the country-barn stand open and 
  ready; 


  The dried grass of the harvest-time loads the slow-
  drawn wagon; 


  The clear light plays on the brown gray and green in-
  ter tinged; 

The armfuls are packt to the sagging mow.



  I am there&#8212;I help&#8212;I came stretcht atop of the 
  load; 

I felt its soft jolts&#8212;one leg reclined on the other;

  I jump from the cross-beams and seize the clover and 
  timothy,


  And roll head over heels, and tangle my hair full of 
  wisps.




10

Alone, far in the wilds and mountains, I hunt,
Wandering, amazed at my own lightness and glee;

  In the late afternoon choosing a safe spot to pass the 
  night,

Kindling a fire and broiling the fresh kill'd game;

  Falling asleep on the gather'd leaves, with my dog and 
  gun by my side.




  The Yankee clipper is under her three sky-sails&#8212; 
  she cuts the sparkle and scud; 


  My eyes settle the land&#8212;I bend at her prow, or shout 
  joyously from the deck.




  The boatman and clam-diggers arose early and stopt 
  for me; 





  I tuck'd my trowser-ends in my boots, and went and 
  had a good time: 


  You should have been with us that day round the 
  chowder-kettle.




  I saw the marriage of the trapper in the open air in 
  the far-west&#8212;the bride was a red girl; 


  Her father and his friends sat near, cross-legged and 
  dumbly smoking&#8212;they had moccasins to their 
  feet, and large thick blankets hanging from their 
  shoulders; 


  On a bank lounged the trapper&#8212;he was drest mostly 
  in skins&#8212;his luxuriant beard and curls pro-
  tected his neck&#8212;he held his bride by the hand; 


  She had long eye-lashes&#8212;her head was bare&#8212;her 
  coarse straight locks descended upon her volup-
  tuous limbs and reach'd to her feet.




  The runaway slave came to my house and stopt out-
  side; 


  I heard his motions crackling the twigs of the wood-
  pile; 


  Through the swung half-door of the kitchen I saw him 
  limpsy and weak,


  And went where he sat on a log, and led him in and 
  assured him,


  And brought water, and fill'd a tub for his sweated 
  body and bruis'd feet,


  And gave him a room that enter'd from my own, and 
  gave him some coarse clean clothes,


  And remember perfectly well his revolving eyes and 
  his awkwardness,


  And remember putting plasters on the galls of his 
  neck and ankles; 


  He staid with me a week before he was recuperated 
  and pass'd north; 


  (I had him sit next me at table&#8212;my fire-lock lean'd 
  in the corner.)







11

Twenty-eight young men bathe by the shore;
Twenty-eight young men, and all so friendly:

  Twenty-eight years of womanly life, and all so lone-
  some.



She owns the fine house by the rise of the bank;

  She hides, handsome and richly drest, aft the blinds 
  of the window.



Which of the young men does she like the best?
Ah, the homeliest of them is beautiful to her.


Where are you off to, lady?for I see you;

  You splash in the water there, yet stay stock still in 
  your room.




  Dancing and laughing along the beach came the 
  twenty-ninth bather; 


  The rest did not see her, but she saw them and loved 
  them.




  The beards of the young men glisten'd with wet, it 
  ran from their long hair; 

Little streams pass'd all over their bodies.


An unseen hand also pass'd over their bodies;

  It descended tremblingly from their temples and 
  ribs.




  The young men float on their backs&#8212;their white 
  bellies bulge to the sun&#8212;they do not ask who 
  seizes fast to them; 


  They do not know who puffs and declines with pen-
  dant and bending arch; 

They do not think whom they souse with spray.






12


  The butcher-boy puts off his killing clothes, or 
  sharpens his knife at the stall in the market; 


  I loiter, enjoying his repartee and his shuffle and 
  break-down.




  Blacksmiths with grimed and hairy chests environ 
  the anvil; 


  Each has his main-sledge&#8212;they are all out&#8212;(there is 
  a great heat in the fire.)




  From the cinder-strew'd threshold I follow their 
  movements; 


  The lithe sheer of their waists plays even with their 
  massive arms; 


  Overhand the hammers swing&#8212;overhand so slow&#8212; 
  overhand so sure: 

They do not hasten&#8212;each man hits in his place.



13


  The negro holds firmly the reins of his four horses 
  &#8212;the block swags underneath on its tied-over 
  chain; 


  The negro that drives the dray of the stone-yard&#8212; 
  steady and tall he stands, poised on one leg on 
  the string-piece; 


  His blue shirt exposes his ample neck and breast, and 
  loosens over his hip-band; 


  His glance is calm and commanding&#8212;he tosses the 
  slouch of his hat away from his forehead; 


  The sun falls on his crispy hair and moustache&#8212;falls 
  on the black of his polish'd and perfect limbs.




  I behold the picturesque giant, and love him&#8212;and I 
  do not stop there; 

I go with the team also.






  In me the caresser of life wherever moving&#8212;back-
  ward as well as forward slueing; 

To niches aside and junior bending.

  Oxen that rattle the yoke and chain, or halt in the 
  leafy shade! what is that you express in your 
  eyes?


  It seems to me more than all the print I have read in 
  my life.




  My tread scares the wood-drake and wood-duck, on 
  my distant and day-long ramble; 



I believe in those wing'd purposes,

  And acknowledge red, yellow, white, playing within 
  me,


  And consider green and violet, and the tufted crown,
  intentional,


  And do not call the tortoise unworthy because she is 
  not something else; 


  And the jay in the woods never studied the gamut,
  yet trills pretty well to me; 


  And the look of the bay mare shames silliness out of 
  me.




14


  The wild gander leads his flock through the cool 
  night; 


  Ya-honk! he says, and sounds it down to me like an 
  invitation; 


  (The pert may suppose it meaningless, but I listen 
  close; 


  I find its purpose and place up there toward the 
  wintry sky.)




  The sharp hoof'd moose of the north, the cat on the 
  house-sill, the chickadee, the prairie-dog,




The litter of the grunting sow as they tug at her teats,

  The brood of the turkey 
  spread wings; 

I see in them and myself the same old law.



  The press of my foot to the earth springs a hundred 
  affections; 

They scorn the best I can do to relate them.


I am enamour'd of growing outdoors,

  Of men that live among cattle, or taste of the ocean 
  or woods,


  Of the builders and steerers of ships, and the wielders 
  of axes and mauls, and the drivers of horses; 

I can eat and sleep with them week in and week out.



  What is commonest, cheapest, nearest, easiest, is 
  Me; 

Me going in for my chances, spending for vast returns;

  Adorning myself to bestow myself on the first that 
  will take me; 

Not asking the sky to come down to my good will;
Scattering it freely forever.



15

The pure contralto sings in the organ loft;

  The carpenter dresses his plank&#8212;the tongue of his 
  foreplane whistles its wild ascending lisp; 


  The married and unmarried children ride home to 
  their Thanksgiving dinner; 


  The pilot seizes the king-pin&#8212;he heaves down with a 
  arm; 


  The mate stands braced in the whale-boat&#8212;lance and 
  harpoon are ready; 


  The duck-shooter walks by silent and cautious 
  stretches; 


  The deacons are ordain'd with cross'd hands at the 
  altar; 





  The spinning-girl retreats and advances to the hum of 
  the big wheel; 


  The farmer stops by the bars, as he walks on a First-
  day loafe, and looks at the oats and rye; 


  The lunatic is carried at last to the asylum, a confirm'd 
  case,


  (He will never sleep any more as he did in the cot in 
  his mother's bed-room;)


  The jour printer with gray head and gaunt jaws works 
  at his case,


  He turns his quid of tobacco, while his eyes blurr with 
  the manuscript; 

The malform'd limbs are tied to the surgeon's table,
What is removed drops horribly in a pail;

  The quadroon girl is sold at the stand&#8212;the drunkard.
  nods by the bar-room stove; 


  The machinist rolls up his sleeves&#8212;the policeman 
  travels his beat&#8212;the gate-keeper marks who pass; 


  The young fellow drives the express-wagon&#8212;(I love 
  him, though I do not know him;)


  The half-breed straps on his light boots to compete in 
  the race; 


  The western turkey-shooting draws old and young&#8212; 
  some lean on their rifles, some sit on logs,


  Out from the crowd steps the marksman, takes his 
  position, levels his piece; 


  The groups of newly-come immigrants cover the 
  wharf or levee; 


  As the woolly-pates hoe in the sugar-field, the overseer 
  views them from his saddle; 


  The bugle calls in the ball-room, the gentlemen run for 
  their partners, the dancers bow to each other; 


  The youth lies awake in the cedar-roof'd garret, and 
  harks to the musical rain; 


  The Wolverine sets traps on the creek that helps fill the 
  Huron; 


  The squaw, wrapt in her yellow-hemm'd cloth, is 
  offering moccasins and bead-bags for sale; 





  The connoisseur peers along the exhibition-gallery with 
  half-shut eyes bent side-ways; 


  As the deck-hands make fast the steamboat, the plank 
  is thrown for the shore-going passengers; 


  The young sister holds out the skein, while the elder 
  sister winds it off in a ball, and stops now and 
  then for the knots; 


  The one-year wife is recovering and happy, having a 
  week ago borne her first child; 


  The clean-hair'd Yankee girl works with her sewing-
  machine, or in the factory or mill; 


  The nine months' gone is in the parturition chamber,
  her faintness and pains are advancing; 


  The paving-man leans on his two handed rammer&#8212; 
  the reporter's lead flies swiftly over the note-book 
  &#8212;the sign-painter is lettering with red and gold; 


  The canal boy trots on the tow path&#8212;the bookkeeper 
  counts at his desk, the shoemaker waxes his 
  thread; 


  The conductor beats time for the band, and all the 
  performers follow him; 


  The child is baptized&#8212;the convert is making his first 
  professions; 


  The regatta is spread on the bay&#8212;the race is begun 
  &#8212;how the white sails sparkle!


  The drover, watching his drove, sings out to them that 
  would stray; 


  The pedler sweats with his pack on his back, (the pur-
  chaser higgling about the odd cent;)


  The camera and plate are prepared, the lady must sit 
  for her daguerreotype; 


  The bride unrumples her white dress, the minute-hand 
  of the clock moves slowly; 


  The opium-eater reclines with rigid head and just-
  open'd lips; 


  The prostitute draggles her shawl, her bonnet bobs on 
  her tipsy and pimpled neck; 


  The crowd laugh at her blackguard oaths, the men 
  jeer and wink to each other; 




(Miserable! I do not laugh at your oaths, nor jeer you;)

  The President, holding a cabinet council, is surrounded 
  by the Great Secretaries; 


  On the piazza walk three matrons stately and friendly 
  with twined arms; 


  The crew of the fish-smack pack repeated layers of 
  halibut in the hold; 


  The Missourian crosses the plains, toting his wares and 
  his cattle; 


  As the fare-collector goes through the train, he gives 
  notice by the jingling of loose change; 


  The floor-men are laying the floor&#8212;the tinners are 
  tinning the roof&#8212;the masons are calling for 
  mortar; 


  In single file, each shouldering his hod, pass onward 
  the laborers; 


  Seasons pursuing each other, the indescribable crowd 
  is gather'd&#8212;it is the Fourth of Seventh-month 
  &#8212;(What salutes of cannon and small arms!)


  Seasons pursuing each other, the plougher ploughs, the 
  mower mows, and the winter-grain falls in the 
  ground; 


  Off on the lakes the pike-fisher watches and waits by 
  the hole in the frozen surface; 


  The stumps stand thick round the clearing, the squatter 
  strikes deep with his axe; 


  Flatboatmen make fast, towards dusk, near the cotton-
  wood or pekan-trees; 


  Coon-seekers go through the regions of the Red river,
  or through those drain'd by the Tennessee, or 
  through those of the Arkansaw; 


  Torches shine in the dark that hangs on the Chatta-
  hooche or Altamahaw; 


  Patriarchs sit at supper with sons and grandsons and 
  great-grandsons around them; 


  In walls of adobie, in canvas tents, rest hunters and 
  trappers after their day's sport; 

The city sleeps, and the country sleeps;




  The living sleep for their time, the dead sleep for their 
  time; 


  The old husband sleeps by his wife, and the young 
  husband sleeps by his wife; 


  And these one and all tend inward to me, and I tend 
  outward to them; 

And such as it is to be of these, more or less, I am.



16


  I am of old and young, of the foolish as much as the 
  wise; 

Regardless of others, ever regardful of others,
Maternal as well as paternal, a child as well as a man,

  Stuff'd with the stuff that is coarse, and stuff'd with 
  the stuff that is fine; 


  One of the great nation, the nation of many nations,
  the smallest the same, and the largest the same; 


  A southerner soon as a northerner&#8212;a planter non-
  chalant and hospitable, down by the Oconee I 
  live; 


  A Yankee, bound my own way, ready for trade, my 
  joints the limberest joints on earth, and the 
  sternest joints on earth; 


  A Kentuckian, walking the vale of the Elkhorn in my 
  deer-skin leggings&#8212;a Louisianian or Georgian; 


  A boatman over lakes or bays, or along coasts&#8212;a 
  Hoosier, Badger, Buckeye; 


  At home on Kanadian snow-shoes, or up in the bush,
  or with fishermen off Newfoundland; 


  At home in the fleet of ice-boats, sailing with the rest 
  and tacking; 


  At home on the hills of Vermont, or in the woods of 
  Maine, or the Texan ranch; 


  Comrade of Californians&#8212;comrade of free north-west-
  erners, (loving their big proportions;)


  Comrade of raftsmen and coalmen&#8212;comrade of all who 
  shake hands and welcome to drink and meat; 


  A learner with the simplest, a teacher of the thought-
  fullest; 





  A novice beginning, yet experient of myriads of sea-
  sons; 


  Of every hue and caste am I, of every rank and re-
  ligion; 

A farmer, mechanic, artist, gentleman, sailor, quaker;

  A prisoner, fancy-man, rowdy, lawyer, physician,
  priest.



I resist anything better than my own diversity;
I breathe the air, but leave plenty after me,
And am not stuck up, and am in my place.


(The moth and the fish-eggs are in their place;

  The suns I see, and the suns I cannot see, are in their 
  place; 


  The palpable is in its place, and the impalpable is in its 
  place.)




17


  These are the thoughts of all men in all ages and 
  lands&#8212;they are not original with me; 


  If they are not yours as much as mine, they are 
  nothing, or next to nothing; 


  If they are not the riddle and the untying of the rid-
  dle, they are nothing; 


  If they are not just as close as they are distant, they 
  are nothing.




  This is the grass that grows wherever the land is,
  and the water is; 

This is the common air that bathes the globe.



18


  With music strong I come&#8212;with my cornets and 
  my drums,


  I play not marches for accepted victors only&#8212;I play 
  great marches for conquer'd and slain persons.






Have you heard that it was good to gain the day?

  I also say it is good to fall&#8212;battles are lost in the same 
  spirit in which they are won.



I beat and pound for the dead;

  I blow through my embouchures my loudest and gay-
  est for them.



Vivas to those who have fail'd!
And to those whose war-vessels sank in the sea!
And to those themselves who sank in the sea!

  And to all generals that lost engagements! and all 
  overcome heroes!


  And the numberless unknown heroes, equal to the 
  greatest heroes known.




19


  This is the meal pleasantly set&#8212;this is the meat for 
  natural hunger; 


  It is for the wicked just the same as the righteous&#8212;I 
  make appointments with all; 

I will not have a single person slighted or left away;
The kept-woman, sponger, thief, are hereby invited;

  The heavy-lipp'd slave is invited&#8212;the venerealee is 
  invited: 

There shall be no difference between them and the rest.



  This is the press of a bashful hand&#8212;this is the float 
  and odor of hair; 


  This is the touch of my lips to yours&#8212;this is the mur-
  mur of yearning; 


  This is the far-off depth and height reflecting my own 
  face; 


  This is the thoughtful merge of myself, and the outlet &lt; 
  again.



Do you guess I have some intricate purpose?

  Well, I have&#8212;for the Fourth-month showers have,
  and the mica on the side of a rock has.






Do you take it I would astonish?

  Does the daylight astonish? Does the early redstart,
  twittering through the woods?

Do I astonish more than they?


This hour I tell things in confidence;
I might not tell everybody, but I will tell you.



20

Who goes there? hankering, gross, mystical, nude;
How is it I extract strength from the beef I eat?


What is a man, anyhow? What am I? What are you?



  All I mark as my own, you shall offset it with your 
  own; 

Else it were time lost listening to me.


I do not snivel that snivel the world over,

  That months are vacuums, and the ground but wal-
  low and filth; 


  That life is a suck and a sell, and nothing remains at 
  the end but threadbare crape, and tears.




  Whimpering and truckling fold with powders for 
  invalids&#8212;conformity goes to the fourth-remov'd; 

I wear my hat as I please, indoors or out.



  Why should I pray? Why should I venerate and 
  be ceremonious?




  Having pried through the strata, analyzed to a hair,
  counsell'd with doctors, and calculated close,

I find no sweeter fat then sticks to my own bones.






  In all people I see myself&#8212;none more, and not one 
  a barley-corn less; 

And the good or bad I say of myself, I say of them.


And I know I am solid and sound;

  To me the converging objects of the universe perpetu-
  ally flow; 


  All are written to me, and I must get what the writing 
  means.



I know I am deathless;

  I know this orbit of mine cannot be swept by the car-
  penter's compass; 


  I know I shall not pass like a child's carlacue cut with 
  a burnt stick at night.



I know I am august;

  I do not trouble my spirit to vindicate itself or be 
  understood; 

I see that the elementary laws never apologize;

  (I reckon I behave no prouder than the level I plant 
  my house by, after all.)



I exist as I am&#8212;that is enough;
If no other in the world be aware, I sit content;
And if each and all be aware, I sit content.



  One world is aware, and by far the largest to me,
  and that is myself; 


  And whether I come to my own to-day, or in ten 
  thousand or ten million years,


  I can cheerfully take it now, or with equal cheerful-
  ness I can wait.



My foothold is tenon'd and mortis'd in granite;
I laugh at what you call dissolution;
And I know the amplitude of time.






21

I am the poet of the Body;
And I am the poet of the Soul.



  The pleasures of heaven are with me, and the pains 
  of hell are with me; 


  The first I graft and increase upon myself&#8212;the latter 
  I translate into a new tongue.



I am the poet of the woman the same as the man;
And I say it is as great to be a woman as to be a man;

  And I say there is nothing greater than the mother of 
  men.



I chant the chant of dilation or pride;
We have had ducking and deprecating about enough;
I show that size is only development.



  Have you outstript the rest? Are you the Presi-
  dent?


  It is a trifle&#8212;they will more than arrive there, every 
  one, and still pass on.




  I am he that walks with the tender and growing 
  night; 

I call to the earth and sea, half-held by the night.



  Press close, bare-bosom'd night! Press close, mag-
  netic, nourishing night!

Night of south winds! night of the large few stars!
Still, nodding night! mad, naked, summer night.


Smile, O voluptuous, cool-breath'd earth!
Earth of the slumbering and liquid trees;

  Earth of departed sunset! earth of the mountains,
  misty-topt!


  Earth of the vitreous pour of the full moon, just 
  tinged with blue!





  Earth of shine and dark, mottling the tide of the 
  river!


  Earth of the limpid gray of clouds, brighter and 
  clearer for my sake!


  Far-swooping elbow'd earth! rich, apple-blossom'd 
  earth!

Smile, for your lover comes!



  Prodigal, you have given me love! Therefore I to 
  you give love!

O unspeakable, passionate love!



22


  You sea! I resign myself to you also&#8212;I guess 
  what you mean; 

I behold from the beach your crooked inviting fingers;
I believe you refuse to go back without feeling of me;

  We must have a turn together&#8212;I undress&#8212;hurry me 
  out of sight of the land; 

Cushion me soft, rock me in billowy drowse;


Sea of stretch'd ground-swells!
Sea breathing broad and convulsive breaths!

  Sea of the brine of life! sea of unshovell'd yet always-
  ready graves!

Howler and scooper of storms! capricious and dainty sea!

  I am integral with you&#8212;I too am of one phase, and of 
  all phases.




  Partaker of influx and efflux I&#8212;extoller of hate and 
  conciliation; 


  Extoller of amies, and those that sleep in each others' 
  arms.



I am he attesting sympathy;

  (Shall I make my list of things in the house, and skip 
  the house that supports them?)







  I am not the poet of goodness only&#8212;I do not de-
  cline to be the poet of wickedness also.




  Washes and razors for foofoos&#8212;for me freckles and 
  a bristling beard.



What blurt is this about virtue and about vice?

  Evil propels me, and reform of evil propels me&#8212;I 
  stand indifferent; 

My gait is no fault-finder's or rejecter's gait;
I moisten the roots of all that has grown.



  Did you fear some scrofula out of the unflagging 
  pregnancy?


  Did you guess the celestial laws are yet to be work'd 
  over and rectified?




  I find one side a balance, and the antipodal side a 
  balance; 

Soft doctrine as steady help as stable doctrine;

  Thoughts and deeds of the present, our rouse and 
  early start.




  This minute that comes to me over the past decil-
  lions,

There is no better than it and now.



  What behaved well in the past, or behaves well 
  to-day, is not such a wonder; 


  The wonder is, always and always, how there can be 
  a mean man or an infidel.




23

Endless unfolding of words of ages!

  And mine a word of the modern&#8212;the word En-
  masse.



A word of the faith that never balks;

  Here or henceforward, it is all the same to me&#8212; 
  I accept time, absolutely.






It alone is without flaw&#8212;it rounds and completes all;
That mystic, baffling wonder I love, alone completes all.


I accept reality, and dare not question it;
Materialism first and last imbuing.



  Hurrah for positive science! long live exact demon-
  stration!


  Fetch stonecrop, mixt with cedar and branches of 
  lilac; 


  This is the lexicographer&#8212;this the chemist&#8212;this 
  made a grammar of the old cartouches; 


  These mariners put the ship through dangerous un-
  known seas; 


  This is the geologist&#8212;this works with the scalpel&#8212; 
  and this is a mathematician.



Gentlemen! to you the first honors always:

  Your facts are useful and real&#8212;and yet they are not 
  my dwelling; 

(I but enter by them to an area of my dwelling.)


Less the reminders of properties told, my words;

  And more the reminders, they, of life untold, and of 
  freedom and extrication,


  And make short account of neuters and geldings, and 
  favor men and women fully equipt,


  And beat the gong of revolt, and stop with fugitives,
  and them that plot and conspire.




24

Walt Whitman am I, of mighty Manhattan the son,

  Turbulent, fleshy and sensual, eating, drinking and 
  breeding; 


  No sentimentalist&#8212;no stander above men and women,
  or apart from them; 

No more modest than immodest.





Unscrew the locks from the doors!
Unscrew the doors themselves from their jambs!


Whoever degrades another degrades me;
And whatever is done or said returns at last to me.



  Through me the afflatus surging and surging&#8212; 
  through me the current and index.




  I speak the pass-word primeval&#8212;I give the sign of 
  democracy; 


  By God! I will accept nothing which all cannot have 
  their counterpart of on the same terms.



Through me many long dumb voices;
Voices of the interminable generations of slaves;
Voices of prostitutes, and of deform'd persons;

  Voices of the diseas'd and despairing, and of thieves 
  and dwarfs; 

Voices of cycles of preparation and accretion,

  And of the threads that connect the stars&#8212;and of 
  wombs, and of the fatherstuff,

And of the rights of them the others are down upon;
Of the trivial, flat, foolish, despised,
Fog in the air, beetles rolling balls of dung.


Through me forbidden voices;

  Voices of sexes and lusts&#8212;voices veil'd, and I remove 
  the veil; 

Voices indecent, by me clarified and transfigur'd.


I do not press my fingers across my mouth;

  I keep as delicate around the bowels as around the 
  head and heart; 

Copulation is no more rank to me than death is.


I believe in the flesh and the appetites;

  Seeing, hearing, feeling, are miracles, and each part 
  and tag of me is a miracle.







  Divine am I inside and out, and I make holy what-
  ever I touch or am touch'd from; 

The scent of these arm-pits, aroma finer than prayer;

  This head more than churches, bibles, and all the 
  creeds.




  If I worship one thing more than another, it shall 
  be the spread of my own body, or any part of it.



Translucent mould of me, it shall be you!
Shaded ledges and rests, it shall be you!
Firm masculine colter, it shall be you.


Whatever goes to the tilth of me, it shall be you!

  You my rich blood! Your milky stream, pale strip-
  pings of my life.




  Breast that presses against other breasts, it shall be 
  you!

My brain, it shall be your occult convolutions.



  Root of wash't sweet-flag! timorous pond-snipe!
  nest of guarded duplicate eggs! it shall be you!


  Mix't tussled hay of head, beard, brawn, it shall be 
  you!


  Trickling sap of maple! fibre of manly wheat! it shall 
  be you!



Sun so generous, it shall be you!
Vapors lighting and shading my face, it shall be you!
You sweaty brooks and dews, it shall be you!

  Winds whose soft-tickling genitals rub against me, it 
  shall be you!


  Broad, muscular fields! branches of live oak! lov-
  ing lounger in my winding paths! it shall be 
  you!


  Hands I have taken&#8212;face I have kiss'd&#8212;mortal I 
  have ever touch'd! it shall be you.







  I dote on myself&#8212;there is that lot of me, and all so 
  luscious; 


  Each moment, and whatever happens, thrills me with 
  joy.



O I am wonderful!

  I cannot tell how my ankles bend, nor whence the cause 
  of my faintest wish; 


  Nor the cause of the friendship I emit, nor the cause 
  of the friendship I take again.




  That I walk up my stoop! I pause to consider if it 
  really be; 


  A morning-glory at my window satisfies me more than 
  the metaphysics of books.



To behold the day-break!

  The little light fades the immense and diaphanous 
  shadows; 

The air tastes good to my palate.



  Hefts of the moving world, at innocent gambols 
  silently rising, freshly exuding,

Scooting obliquely high and low.



  Something I cannot see puts upward libidinous 
  prongs; 

Seas of bright juice suffuse heaven.



  The earth by the sky staid with&#8212;the daily close of 
  their junction; 


  The heav'd challenge from the east that moment over 
  my head; 


  The mocking taunt, See then whether you shall be 
  master!







25


  Dazzling and tremendous, how quick the sun-rise 
  would kill me,


  If I could not now and always send sun-rise out of 
  me.




  We also ascend, dazzling and tremendous as the 
  sun; 


  We found our own, O my Soul, in the calm and cool 
  of the day-break.



My voice goes after what my eyes cannot reach;

  With the twirl of my tongue I encompass worlds, and 
  volumes of worlds.




  Speech is the twin of my vision&#8212;it is unequal to 
  measure itself; 

It provokes me forever;

  It says sarcastically, Walt, you contain enough&#8212;why 
  don't you let it out then? 




  Come now, I will not be tantalized&#8212;you conceive 
  too much of articulation.




  Do you not know, O speech, how the buds beneath 
  you are folded?

Waiting in gloom, protected by frost;
The dirt receding before my prophetical screams;
I underlying causes, to balance them at last;

  My knowledge my live parts&#8212;it keeping tally with 
  the meaning of things; 


  Happiness&#8212;which, whoever hears me, let him or her 
  set out in search of this day.




  My final merit I refuse you&#8212;I refuse putting from 
  me what I really am; 

Encompass worlds, but never try to encompass me;

  I crowd your sleekest and best by simply looking to-
  ward you.






Writing and talk do not prove me;

  I carry the plenum of proof, and everything else, in 
  my face; 


  With the hush of my lips I wholly confound the skep-
  tic.




26

I think I will do nothing now but listen,

  To accrue what I hear into myself&#8212;to let sounds con-
  tribute toward me.




  I hear bravuras of birds, bustle of growing wheat,
  gossip of flames, clack of sticks cooking my 
  meals; 


  I hear the sound I love, the sound of the human 
  voice; 


  I hear all sounds running together, combined, fused 
  or following; 


  Sounds of the city, and sounds out of the city&#8212;sounds 
  of the day and night; 


  Talkative young ones to those that like them&#8212;the 
  loud laugh of work-people at their meals; 


  The angry base of disjointed friendship&#8212;the faint 
  tones of the sick; 


  The judge with hands tight to the desk, his pallid lips 
  pronouncing a death-sentence; 


  The heave'e'yo of stevedores unlading ships by the 
  wharves&#8212;the refrain of the anchor-lifters; 


  The ring of alarm-bells&#8212;the cry of fire&#8212;the whirr of 
  swift-streaking engines and hose-carts, with 
  premonitory tinkles, and color'd lights; 


  The steam-whistle&#8212;the solid roll of the train of ap-
  proaching cars; 


  The slow-march play'd at the head of the association,
  marching two and two; 


  (They go to guard some corpse&#8212;the flag-tops are 
  draped with black muslin.)







  I hear the violoncello, ('tis the young man's heart's 
  complaint;)


  I hear the key'd cornet&#8212;it glides quickly in through 
  my ears; 


  It shakes mad-sweet pangs through my belly and 
  breast.



I hear the chorus&#8212;it is a grand opera;
Ah, this indeed is music! This suits me.


A tenor large and fresh as the creation fills me;

  The orbic flex of his mouth is pouring and filling me 
  full.




  I hear the train'd soprano&#8212;(what work, with hers,
  is this?)


  The orchestra wrenches such ardors from me, I did 
  not know I possess'd them; 


  It sails me&#8212;I dab with bare feet&#8212;they are lick'd by 
  the indolent waves; 


  I am exposed, cut by bitter and angry hail&#8212;I lose my 
  breath,


  Steep'd amid honey'd morphine, my windpipe throt-
  tled in fakes of death; 

At length let up again to feel the puzzle of puzzles,
And that we call BEING.



27

To be, in any form&#8212;what is that?

  (Round and round we go, all of us, and ever come 
  back thither;)


  If nothing lay more develop't, the quahaug in its cal-
  lous shell were enough.



Mine is no callous shell;

  I have instant conductors all over me, whether I pass 
  or stop; 





  They seize every object, and lead it harmlessly through 
  me.




  I merely stir, press, feel with my fingers, and am 
  happy; 


  To touch my person to some one else's is about as 
  much as I can stand.




28


  Is this then a touch? quivering me to a new 
  identity,

Flames and ether making a rush for my veins,

  Treacherous tip of me reaching and crowding to help 
  them,


  My flesh and blood playing out lightning to strike 
  what is hardly different from myself; 

On all sides prurient provokers stiffening my limbs,
Straining the udder of my heart for its withheld drip,
Behaving licentious toward me, taking no denial,
Depriving me of my best, as for a purpose,

  Unbuttoning my clothes, holding me by the bare 
  waist,


  Deluding my confusion with the calm of the sunlight 
  and pasture-fields,

Immodestly sliding the fellow-senses away,

  They bribed to swap off with touch, and go and graze 
  at the edges of me; 


  No consideration, no regard for my draining strength 
  or my anger; 


  Fetching the rest of the herd around to enjoy them a 
  while,


  Then all uniting to stand on a headland and worry 
  me.



The sentries desert every other part of me;
They have left me helpless to a red marauder;

  They all come to the headland, to witness and assist 
  against me.






I am given up by traitors;

  I talk wildly&#8212;I have lost my wits&#8212;I and nobody else 
  am the greatest traitor; 


  I went myself first to the headland&#8212;my own hands 
  carried me there.




  You villain touch! what are you doing? My breath 
  is tight in its throat; 

Unclench your floodgates! you are too much for me.



29


  Blind, loving, wrestling touch! sheath'd, hooded,
  sharp-tooth'd touch!

Did it make you ache so, leaving me?



  Parting, track't by arriving&#8212;perpetual payment of 
  perpetual loan; 


  Rich, showering rain, and recompense richer after-
  ward.




  Sprouts take and accumulate&#8212;stand by the curb 
  prolific and vital; 


  Landscapes, projected, masculine, full-sized, and 
  golden.




30

All truths wait in all things;
They neither hasten their own delivery, nor resist it;
They do not need the obstetric forceps of the surgeon;
The insignificant is as big to me as any;
(What is less or more than a touch?)


Logic and sermons never convince;
The damp of the night drives deeper into my soul.



  Only what proves itself to every man and woman 
  is so; 

Only what nobody denies is so. 
         




A minute and a drop of me settle my brain;

  I believe the soggy clods shall become lovers and 
  lamps,


  And a compend of compends is the meat of a man or 
  woman,


  And a summit and flower there is the feeling they have 
  for each other,


  And they are to branch boundlessly out of that lesson,
  until it becomes omnific,

And until every one shall delight us, and we them.



31


  I believe a leaf of grass is no less than the journey-
  work of the stars,


  And the pismire is equally perfect, and a grain of 
  sand, and the egg of the wren,

And the tree-toad is a chef-d'oeuvre for the highest,

  And the running blackberry would adorn the parlors 
  of heaven,


  And the narrowest hinge in my hand puts to scorn all 
  machinery,


  And the cow crunching with depres't head surpasses 
  any statue,


  And a mouse is miracle enough to stagger sextillions 
  of infidels,


  And I could come every afternoon of my life to look 
  at the farmer's girl boiling her iron ten-kettle 
  and baking short-cake.




  I find I incorporate gneiss, coal, long-threaded moss,
  fruits, grains, esculent roots,

And am stuccoed with quadrupeds and birds all over,

  And have distanced what is behind me for good 
  reasons,

And call anything close again, when I desire it.


In vain the speeding or shyness;




  In vain the plutonic rocks send their old heat against 
  my approach; 


  In vain the mastadon retreats beneath its own pow-
  der'd bones; 


  In vain objects stand leagues off, and assume manifold 
  shapes; 


  In vain the ocean settling in hollows, and the great 
  monsters lying low; 

In vain the buzzard houses herself with the sky;

  In vain the snake slides through the creepers and 
  logs; 

In vain the elk takes to the inner passes of the woods;
In vain the razor-bill'd auk sails far north to Labrador;

  I follow quickly, I ascend to the nest in the fissure of 
  the cliff.




32


  I think I could turn and live with animals, they are 
  so placid and self-contain'd; 

I stand and look at them long and long.


They do not sweat and whine about their condition;

  They do not lie awake in the dark and weep for their 
  sins; 


  They do not make me sick discussing their duty to 
  God; 


  Not one is dissatisfied&#8212;not one is demented with the 
  mania of owning things; 


  Not one kneels to another, nor to his kind that lived 
  thousands of years ago; 


  Not one is respectable or industrious over the whole 
  earth.




  So they show their relations to me, and I accept 
  them; 


  They bring me tokens of myself&#8212;they evince them 
  plainly in their possession.






I wonder where they get those tokens:

  Did I pass that way huge times ago, and negligently 
  drop them?

Myself moving forward then and now and forever,
Gathering and showing more always and with velocity,

  Infinite and omnigenous, and the like of these among 
  them; 


  Not too exclusive toward the reachers of my remem-
  brancers; 


  Picking out here one that I love, and now go with him 
  on brotherly terms.




  A gigantic beauty of a stallion, fresh and responsive 
  to my caresses,

Head high in the forehead, wide between the ears,
Limbs glossy and supple, tail dusting the ground,

  Eyes well apart, full of sparkling wickedness&#8212;ears 
  finely cut, flexibly moving.



His nostrils dilate, as my heels embrace him;

  His well-built limbs tremble with pleasure, as we speed 
  around and return.



I but use you a moment, then I resign you, stallion;

  Why do I need your paces, when I myself out-gallop 
  them?

Even, as I stand or sit, passing faster than you.



33


  O swift wind! O space and time! now I see it is 
  true, what I guess'd at; 

What I guess'd when I loaf'd on the grass;
What I guess'd while I lay alone in my bed,

  And again as I walk'd the beach under the paling 
  stars of the morning.







  My ties and ballasts leave me&#8212;I travel&#8212;I sail&#8212;my 
  elbows rest in the sea-gaps; 

I skirt the sierras&#8212;my palms cover continents;
I am afoot with my vision.



  By the city's quadrangular houses&#8212;in log huts&#8212; 
  camping with lumbermen; 


  Along the ruts of the turnpike&#8212;along the dry gulch 
  and rivulet bed; 


  Weeding my onion-patch, or hoeing rows of carrots 
  and parsnips&#8212;crossing savannas&#8212;trailing in 
  forests; 


  Prospecting&#8212;gold-digging&#8212;girdling the trees of a 
  new purchase; 


  Scorch'd ankle-deep by the hot sand&#8212;hauling my boat 
  down the shallow river; 


  Where the panther walks to and fro on a limb over-
  head&#8212;where the buck turns furiously at the 
  hunter; 


  Where the rattlesnake suns his flabby length on a rock 
  &#8212;where the otter is feeding on fish; 


  Where the alligator in his tough pimples sleeps by the 
  bayou; 


  Where the black bear is searching for roots or honey 
  &#8212;where the beaver pats the mud with his 
  paddle-shaped tail; 


  Over the growing sugar&#8212;over the yellow-flower'd cot-
  ton plant&#8212;over the rice in its low moist field; 


  Over the sharp-peak'd farm house, with its scallop'd 
  scum and slender shoots from the gutters; 


  Over the western persimmon&#8212;over the long-leav'd 
  corn&#8212;over the delicate blue-flower flax; 


  Over the white and brown buckwheat, a hummer and 
  buzzer there with the rest; 


  Over the dusky green of the rye as it ripples and 
  shades in the breeze; 





  Scaling mountains, pulling myself cautiously up, hold-
  ing on by low scragged limbs; 


  Walking the path worn in the grass, and beat through 
  the leaves of the brush; 


  Where the quail is whistling betwixt the woods and 
  the wheat-lot; 


  Where the bat flies in the Seventh-month eve&#8212;where 
  the great gold-bug drops through the dark; 

Where the flails keep time on the barn floor;

  Where the brook puts out of the roots of the old tree 
  and flows to the meadow; 


  Where cattle stand and shake away flies with the 
  tremulous shuddering of their hides; 


  Where the cheese-cloth hangs in the kitchen&#8212;where 
  andirons straddle the hearth 
  webs fall in festoons from the rafters; 


  Where trip-hammers crash&#8212;where the press is whirl-
  ing its cylinders; 


  Wherever the human heart beats with terrible throes 
  out of its ribs; 


  Where the pear-shaped balloon is floating aloft, float-
  ing in it myself, and looking composedly down; 


  Where the life-car is drawn on the slip-noose&#8212;where 
  the heat hatches pale-green eggs in the dented 
  sand; 


  Where the she-whale swims with her calf, and never 
  forsakes it; 


  Where the steam-ship trails hind-ways its long pennant 
  of smoke; 


  Where the fin of the shark cuts like a black chip out 
  of the water; 


  Where the half-burn'd brig is riding on unknown cur-
  rents,


  Where shells grow to her slimy deck&#8212;where the dead 
  are corrupting below; 


  Where the dense-starr'd flag is borne at the head of the 
  regiments; 


  Approaching Manhattan, up by the long-stretching 
  island; 





  Under Niagara, the cataract falling like a veil over my 
  countenance; 


  Upon a doorblock of hard wood 
  outside; 


  Upon the race-course, or enjoying picnics or jigs, or a 
  good game of base-ball; 


  At he-festivals, with blackguard gibes, ironical license,
  bull-dances, drinking, laughter; 


  At the cider-mill, tasting the sweets of the brown 
  mash, sucking the juice through a straw; 


  At apple-peelings, wanting kisses for all the red fruit 
  I find; 


  At musters, beach-parties, friendly bees, huskings,
  house-raisings: 


  Where the mocking-bird sounds his delicious gurgles,
  cackles, screams, weeps; 


  Where the hay-rick stands in the barn-yard&#8212;where 
  the dry-stalks are scatter'd&#8212;where the brood 
  cow waits in the hovel; 


  Where the bull advances to do his masculine work&#8212; 
  where the stud to the mare&#8212;where the cock is 
  treading the hen; 


  Where the heifers browse&#8212;where geese nip their food 
  with short jerks; 


  Where sun-down shadows lengthen over the limit-
  less and lonesome prairie; 


  Where herds of buffalo make a crawling spread of the 
  square miles far and near; 


  Where the humming-bird shimmers&#8212;where the neck 
  of the long-lived swan is curving and winding; 


  Where the laughing-gull scoots by the shore, where 
  she laughs her near-human laugh; 


  Where bee-hives range on a gray bench in the garden,
  half hid by the high weeds; 


  Where band-neck'd partridges roost in a ring on the 
  ground with their heads out; 


  Where burial coaches enter the arch'd gates of a 
  cemetery; 





  Where winter wolves bark amid wastes of snow and 
  icicled trees; 


  Where the yellow-crown'd heron comes to the edge of 
  the marsh at night and feeds upon small crabs; 


  Where the splash of swimmers and divers cools the 
  warm noon; 


  Where the katy-did works her chromatic reed on the 
  walnut-tree over the well; 


  Through patches of citrons and cucumbers with silver-
  wired leaves; 


  Through the salt-lick or orange glade, or under con-
  ical firs; 


  Through the gymnasium&#8212;through the curtain'd saloon 
  &#8212;through the office or public hall; 


  Pleas'd with the native, and pleas'd with the foreign 
  &#8212;pleas'd with the new and old; 


  Pleas'd with women, the homely as well as the hand-
  some; 


  Pleas'd with the quakeress as she puts off her bonnet 
  and talks melodiously; 


  Pleas'd with the tune of the choir of the white-washt 
  church; 


  Pleas'd with the earnest words of the sweating Meth-
  odist preacher, or any preacher&#8212;imprest seri-
  ously at the camp-meeting: 


  Looking in at the shop-windows of Broadway the 
  whole forenoon&#8212;flatting the flesh of my nose 
  on the thick plate-glass; 


  Wandering the same afternoon with my face turn'd up 
  to the clouds,


  My right and left arms round the sides of two friends,
  and I in the middle: 


  Coming home with the silent and dark-cheek'd bush-
  boy&#8212;behind me he rides at the drape of the 
  day; 


  Far from the settlements, studying the print of ani-
  mals' feet, or the moccasin print; 


  By the cot in the hospital, reaching lemonade to a 
  feverish patient; 





  Nigh the coffin'd corpse when all is still, examining 
  with a candle: 

Voyaging to every port, to dicker and adventure;

  Hurrying with the modern crowd, as eager and fickle 
  as any; 


  Hot toward one I hate, ready in my madness to knife 
  him; 


  Solitary at midnight in my back yard, my thoughts 
  gone from me a long while; 


  Walking the old hills of Judea, with the beautiful 
  gentle God by my side; 


  Speeding through space&#8212;speeding through heaven and 
  the stars; 


  Speeding amid the seven satellites, and the broad 
  ring, and the diameter of eighty thousand 
  miles; 


  Speeding with tail'd meteors&#8212;throwing fire-balls like 
  the rest; 


  Carrying the crescent child that carries its own full 
  mother in its belly; 

Storming, enjoying, planning, loving, cautioning,
Backing and filling, appearing and disappearing;
I tread day and night such roads.



  I visit the orchards of spheres, and look at the 
  product; 


  And look at quintillions ripen'd, and look at quintil-
  lions green.



I fly the flight of the fluid and swallowing soul;
My course runs below the soundings of plummets.


I help myself to material and immaterial;
No guard can shut me off, nor law prevent me.





I anchor my ship for a little while only;

  My messengers continually cruise away, or bring their 
  returns to me.




  I go hunting polar furs and the seal&#8212;leaping 
  chasms with a pike-pointed staff&#8212;clinging to 
  topples of brittle and blue.



I ascend to the foretruck;
I take my place late at night in the crow's-nest;
We sail the arctic sea&#8212;it is plenty light enough;

  Through the clear atmosphere I stretch around on 
  the wonderful beauty; 


  The enormous masses of ice pass me, and I pass them 
  &#8212;the scenery is plain in all directions; 


  The white-topt mountains show in the distance&#8212;I 
  fling out my fancies toward them; 

         
  (We are approaching some great battle-field in which 
  we are soon to be engaged; 


  We pass the colossal out-posts of the encampment&#8212; 
  we pass with still feet and caution; 


  Or we are entering by the suburbs some vast and 
  ruin'd city; 


  The blocks and fallen architecture more than all the 
  living cities of the globe.)




  I am a free companion&#8212;I bivouac by invading 
  watchfires.




  I turn the bridegroom out of bed, and stay with the 
  bride myself; 

I tighten her all night to my thighs and lips.



  My voice is the wife's voice, the screech by the rail 
  of the stairs; 

They fetch my man's body up, dripping and drown'd.





I understand the large hearts of heroes,
The courage of present times and all times;

  How the skipper saw the crowded and rudderless 
  wreck of the steam-ship, and Death chasing it 
  up and down the storm; 


  How he knuckled tight, and gave not back one inch,
  and was faithful of days and faithful of nights,


  And chalk'd in large letters, on a board, Be of good 
  cheer, we will not desert you: 


  How he follow'd with them, and tack'd with them&#8212; 
  and would not give it up; 

How he saved the drifting company at last:

  How the lank loose-gown'd women look'd when 
  boated from the side of their prepared graves; 


  How the silent old-faced infants, and the lifted sick,
  and the sharp-lipp'd unshaved men: 


  All this I swallow&#8212;it tastes good&#8212;I like it well&#8212;it 
  becomes mine; 

I am the man&#8212;I suffer'd&#8212;I was there.


The disdain and calmness of martyrs;

  The mother, condemn'd for a witch, burnt with dry 
  wood, her children gazing on; 


  The hounded slave that flags in the race, leans by the 
  fence, blowing, cover'd with sweat; 


  The twinges that sting like needles his legs and neck 
  &#8212;the murderous buckshot and the bullets; 

All these I feel or am.



  I am the hounded slave, I wince at the bite of the 
  dogs,


  Hell and despair are upon me, crack and again crack 
  the marksmen; 


  I clutch the rails of the fence, my gore dribs, thinn'd 
  with the ooze of my skin; 

I fall on the weeds and stones;
The riders spur their unwilling horses, haul close,




  Taunt my dizzy ears, and beat me violently over the 
  head with whip-stocks.



Agonies are one of my changes of garments;

  I do not ask the wounded person how he feels&#8212;I my-
  self become the wounded person; 


  My hurts turns livid upon me as I lean on a cane and 
  observe.



I am the mash'd fireman with breastbone broken:
Tumbling walls buried me in their debris;

  Heat and smoke I inspired&#8212;I heard the yelling shouts 
  of my comrades; 

I heard the distant click of their picks and shovels;

  They have clear'd the beams away&#8212;they tenderly lift 
  me forth.




  I lie in the night air in my red shirt&#8212;the pervading 
  hush is for my sake; 

Painless after all I lie, exhausted but not so unhappy;

  White and beautiful are the faces around me&#8212;the 
  heads are bared of their fire-caps; 


  The kneeling crowd fades with the light of the 
  torches.



Distant and dead resuscitate;

  They show as the dial or move as the hands of me&#8212; 
  I am the clock myself.




  I am an old artillerist&#8212;I tell of my fort's bombard-
  ment; 

I am there again.


Again the long roll of the drummers;
Again the attacking cannon, mortars;
Again the cannon responsive.





I take part&#8212;I see and hear the whole;

  The cries, curses, roar, the plaudits for well-aim'd 
  shots; 

The ambulanza slowly passing, trailing its red drip;

  Workmen searching after damages, making indispen-
  sable repairs; 


  The fall of grenades through the rent roof&#8212;the fan-
  shaped explosion; 


  The whizz of limbs, heads, stone, wood, iron, high in 
  the air.




  Again gurgles the mouth of my dying general&#8212;he 
  furiously waves with his hand; 


  He gasps through the clot, Mind not me&#8212;mind&#8212;the 
  entrenchments.




34

Now I tell what I knew in Texas in my early youth;
(I tell not the fall of Alamo,
Not one escaped to tell the fall of Alamo,
The hundred and fifty are dumb yet at Alamo;)

  Tis the tale of the murder in cold blood of four hun-
  dred and twelve young men.




  Retreating, they had form'd in a hollow square, with 
  their baggage for breastworks; 


  Nine hundred lives out of the surrounding enemy's,
  nine times their number, was the price they took 
  in advance; 


  Their colonel was wounded and their ammunition 
  gone; 


  They treated for an honorable capitulation, receiv'd 
  writing and seal, gave up their arms, and 
  march'd back prisoners of war.



They were the glory of the race of rangers;
Matchless with horse, rifle, song, supper, courtship,




  Large, turbulent, generous, brave, handsome, proud,
  and affectionate,


  Bearded, sunburnt, drest in the free costume of 
  hunters,

Not a single one over thirty years of age.



  The second First-day morning they were brought 
  out in squads, and massacred&#8212;it was beautiful 
  early summer; 


  The work commenced about five o'clock, and was over 
  by eight.



None obey'd the command to kneel;

  Some made a mad and helpless rush&#8212;some stood 
  stark and straight; 


  A few fell at once, shot in the temple or heart&#8212;the 
  living and dead lay together; 


  The maim'd and mangled dug in the dirt&#8212;the new-
  comers saw them there; 

Some, half-kill'd, attempted to crawl away;

  These were despatch'd with bayonets, or batter'd with 
  the blunts of muskets; 


  A youth not seventeen years old seiz'd his assassin till 
  two more came to release him; 


  The three were all torn, and cover'd with the boy's 
  blood.



At eleven o'clock began the burning of the bodies:

  That is the tale of the murder of the four hundred 
  and twelve young men.




35

Would you hear of an old-fashion'd sea-fight?

  Would you learn who won by the light of the moon 
  and stars?


  List to the story as my grandmother's father, the 
  sailor, told it to me.






Our foe was no skulk in his ship, I tell you, (said he;)

  His was the surly English pluck&#8212;and there is no 
  tougher or truer, and never was, and never will 
  be; 

Along the lower'd eve he came, horribly raking us.



  We closed with him&#8212;the yards entangled&#8212;the 
  cannon touch'd; 

My captain lash'd fast with his own hands.



  We had receiv'd some eighteen-pound shots under 
  the water; 


  On our lower-gun-deck two large pieces had burst at 
  the first fire, killing all around, and blowing up 
  overhead.



Fighting at sun-down, fighting at dark;

  Ten o'clock at night, the full moon well up, our leaks 
  on the gain, and five feet of water reported; 


  The master-at-arms loosing the prisoners confined in 
  the after-hold, to give them a chance for them-
  selves.




  The transit to and from the magazine is now 
  stopt by the sentinels,


  They see so many strange faces, they do not know 
  whom to trust.



Our frigate takes fire;
The other asks if we demand quarter?
If our colors are struck, and the fighting is done?



  Now I laugh content, for I hear the voice of my 
  little captain,(says my grandmother's father;)


  We have not struck, he composedly cries, we have just 
  begun our part of the fighting.






Only three guns are in use;

  One is directed by the captain himself against the 
  enemy's main-mast; 


  Two, well served with grape and canister, silence his 
  musketry and clear his decks.




  The tops alone second the fire of this little battery,
  especially the main-top; 

They hold out bravely during the whole of the action.


Not a moment's cease;

  The leaks gain fast on the pumps&#8212;the fire eats toward 
  the powder-magazine; 


  One of the pumps has been shot away&#8212;it is generally 
  thought we are sinking.



Serene stands the little captain;
He is not hurried&#8212;his voice is neither high nor low;

  His eyes give more light to us than our battle-
  lanterns.




  Toward twelve at night, there in the beams of the 
  moon, they surrender to us.




36


  O now it is not my grandmother's father there in 
  the fight; 

I feel it is I myself.


Stretch'd and still lies the midnight;

  Two great hulls motionless on the breast of the 
  darkness; 


  Our vessel riddled and slowly sinking&#8212;preparations 
  to pass to the one we have conquer'd; 


  The captain on the quarter-deck coldly giving his 
  orders through a countenance white as a sheet; 


  Near by, the corpse of the child that serv'd in the 
  cabin; 





  The dead face of an old salt with long white hair and 
  carefully curl'd whiskers; 


  The flames, spite of all that can be done, flickering 
  aloft and below; 


  The husky voices of the two or three officer yet fit 
  for duty; Formless stacks of bodies, and bodies by themselves&#8212; 
  dabs of flesh upon the masts and spars, Cut of cordage, dangle of rigging, slight shock of the 
  soothe of waves,


  Black and impassive guns, litter of powder-parcels,
  strong scent, Delicate sniffs of sea-breeze, smells of sedgy grass and 
  fields by the shore, death-messages given in 
  charge to survivors,


  The hiss of the surgeon's knife, the gnawing teeth of 
  his saw,


  Wheeze, cluck, swash of falling blood, short wild 
  scream, and long, dull, tapering groan; 

These so&#8212;these irretrievable.



37

O Christ! This is mastering me!

  Through the conquer'd doors they crowd. I am 
  possess'd.



I embody all presences outlaw'd or suffering;
See myself in prison shaped like another man,
And feel the dull unintermitted pain.



  For me the keepers of convicts shoulder their car-
  bines and keep watch; 

It is I let out in the morning, and barr'd at night.



  Not a mutineer walks handcuff'd to jail, but I am 
  handcuff'd to him and walk by his side; 


  (I am less the jolly one there, and more the silent one,
  with sweat on my twitching lips.)







  Not a youngster is taken for larceny, but I go up too,
  and am tried and sentenced.




  Not a cholera patient lies at the last gasp, but I also 
  lie at the last gasp; 


  My face is ash-color'd&#8212;my sinews gnarl&#8212;away from 
  me people retreat.




  Askers embody themselves in me, and I am embo-
  died in them; 

I project my hat, sit shame-faced, and beg.



38

Enough! enough! enough!
Somehow I have been stunn'd. Stand back!

  Give me a little time beyond my cuff'd head, slumbers,
  dreams, gaping; 

I discover myself on the verge of a usual mistake.


That I could forget the mockers and insults!

  That I could forget the trickling tears, and the blows 
  of the bludgeons and hammers!


  That I could look with a separate look on my own 
  crucifixion and bloody crowning.



I remember now;
I resume the overstaid fraction;

  The grave of rock multiplies what has been confided 
  to it, or to any graves; 

Corpses rise, gashes heal, fastenings roll from me.



  I troop forth replenish't with supreme power, one of 
  an average unending procession; 


  Inland and sea-coast we go, and we pass all boundary 
  lines; 





  Our swift ordinances on their way over the whole 
  earth; 


  The blossoms we wear in our hats the growth of thous-
  ands of years.



Eleves, I salute you! come forward!

  Continue your annotations, continue your question-
  ings.




39

The friendly and flowing savage, Who is he?

  Is he waiting for civilization, or past it and master-
  ing it?




  Is he some
south-westerner, rais'd out-doors? Is 
  he Kanadian?


  Is he from the Mississippi country? Iowa, Oregon,
  California? the mountains? prairie-life, bush-
  life? or from the sea?




  Wherever he goes, men and women accept and de-
  sire him; 


  They desire he should like them, touch them, speak to 
  them, stay with them.




  Behavior lawless as snow-flakes, words simple as 
  grass, uncomb'd head, laughter, and naivet&#233;,


  Slow-stepping feet, common features, common modes 
  and emanations; 


  They descend in new forms from the tips of his 
  fingers; 


  They are wafted with the odor of his body or breath 
  &#8212;they fly out of the glance of his eyes.




40


  Flaunt of the sunshine, I need not your bask,&#8212;lie 
  over!


  You light surface only&#8212;I force surfaces and depths 
  also.






Earth! you seem to look for something at my hands;
Say, old Top-knot! what do you want?



  Man or woman! I might tell how I like you, but 
  cannot; 


  And might tell what it is in me, and what it is in you,
  but cannot; 


  And might tell that pining I have&#8212;that pulse of my 
  nights and days.



Behold! I do not give lectures or a little charity;
What I give, I give out of myself.


You there, impotent, loose in the knees!
Open your scarf'd chops till I blow grit within you;
Spread your palms, and lift the flaps of your pockets;

  I am not to be denied&#8212;I compel&#8212;I have stores 
  plenty and to spare; 

And anything I have I bestow.



  I do not ask who you are&#8212;that is not so important 
  to me; 


  You can do nothing, and be nothing, but what I will 
  infold you.



To cotton-field drudge or cleaner of privies I lean;
On his right cheek I put the family kiss,
And deep in my soul I swear, I never will deny him.



  On women fit for conception I start bigger and nim-
  bler babes; 


  This day I am jetting the stuff of far more arrogant 
  republics.




  To any one dying&#8212;thither I speed, and twist the 
  knob of the door; 

Turn the bed-clothes toward the foot of the bed;
Let the physician and the priest go home.






  I seize the descending man, and raise him with re-
  sistless will.



O despairer, here is my neck;

  By God! you shall not go down! Hang your whole 
  weight upon me.




  I dilate you with tremendous breath&#8212;I buoy you 
  up; 

Every room of the house do I fill with an arm'd force,
Lovers of me, bafflers of graves.


Sleep! I and they keep guard all night;

  Not doubt&#8212;not decease shall dare to lay finger upon 
  you; 


  I have embraced you, and henceforth possess you to 
  myself; And when you rise in the morning you will find what 
  I tell you is so.




41


  I am he bringing help for the sick as they pant on 
  their backs; 


  And for strong upright men I bring yet more needed 
  help.



I heard what was said of the universe;
Heard it and heard it of several thousand years:
It is middling well as far as it goes,&#8212;But is that all?


Magnifying and applying come I,
Outbidding at the start the old cautious hucksters,
Taking myself the exact dimensions of Jehovah,

  Lithographing Kronos, Zeus his son, and Hercules 
  his grandson; 

Buying drafts of Osiris, Isis, Belus, Brahma, Buddha,

  In my portfolio placing Manito loose, Allah on a leaf,
  the crucifix engraved,


  With Odin, and the hideous-faced Mexitli, and every 
  idol and image; 





  Taking them all for what they are worth, and not a 
  cent more; 


  Admitting they were alive and did the work of their 
  days; 


  They bore mites, as for unfledg'd birds, who have now 
  to rise and fly and sing for themselves; 


  Accepting the rough deific sketches to fill out better 
  in myself&#8212;bestowing them freely on each man 
  and woman I see; 


  Discovering as much, or more, in a framer framing a 
  house; 


  Putting higher claims for him there with his roll'd up 
  sleeves, driving the mallet and chisel; 


  Not objecting to special revelations&#8212;considering a 
  curl of smoke or a hair on the back of my hand 
  just as curious as any revelation; 


  Lads ahold of fire-engines and hook-and-ladder ropes 
  no less to me than the Gods of the antique wars; 


  Minding their voices peal through the crash of de-
  struction,


  Their brawny limbs passing safe over charr'd laths&#8212; 
  their white foreheads whole and unhurt out of 
  the flames: 


  By the mechanic's wife with her babe at her nipple 
  interceding for every person born; 


  Three scythes at harvest whizzing in a row from three 
  lusty angels with shirts bagg'd out at their 
  waists; 


  The snag-tooth'd hostler with red hair redeeming sins 
  past and to come,


  Selling all he possesses, traveling on foot to fee law-
  yers for his brother, and sit by him while he is 
  tried for forgery; 


  What was strewn in the amplest strewing the square 
  rod about me, and not filling the square rod 
  then; 

The bull and the bug never worship'd half enough;
Dung and dirt more admirable than was dream'd;




  The supernatural of no account&#8212;myself waiting my 
  time to be one of the Supremes; 


  The day getting ready for me when I shall do as much 
  good as the best, and be as prodigious: 

By my life-lumps! becoming already a creator;

  Putting myself here and now to the ambush't womb 
  of the shadows.




42

A call in the midst of the crowd;
My own voice, orotund, sweeping, and final.


Come my children;

  Come my boys and girls, my women, household, and 
  intimates; 


  Now the performer launches his nerve&#8212;he has pass'd 
  his prelude on the reeds within.




  Easily written, loose-finger'd chords! I feel the 
  thrum of your climax and close.



My head slues round on my neck;
Music rolls, but not from the organ;

  Folks are around me, but they are no household of 
  mine.



Ever the hard unsunk ground;

  Ever the eaters and drinkers&#8212;ever the upward and 
  downward sun&#8212;ever the air and the ceaseless 
  tides; 


  Ever myself and my neighbors, refreshing, wicked,
  real; 


  Ever the old inexplicable query&#8212;ever that thorn'd 
  thumb&#8212;that breath of itches and thirsts; 


  Ever the vexer's hoot! hoot! till we find where the sly 
  one hides, and bring him forth; 

Ever love&#8212;ever the sobbing liquid of life;

  Ever the bandage under the chin&#8212;ever the tressels of 
  death.






Here and there, with dimes on the eyes walking;

  To feed the greed of the belly, the brains liberally 
  spooning; 


  Tickets buying, taking, selling, but in to the feast never 
  once going; 


  Many sweating, ploughing, thrashing, and then the chaff 
  for payment receiving; 


  A few idly owning, and they the wheat continually 
  claiming.



This is the city, and I am one of the citizens;

  Whatever interests the rest interests me&#8212;politics,
  markets, newspapers, schools,


  Benevolent societies, improvements, banks, tariffs,
  steamships, factories, stocks, stores, real estate,
  and personal estate.




  The little plentiful mannikins, skipping around in 
  collars and tail'd coats,


  I am aware who they are&#8212;(they are actually not worms 
  or fleas.)




  I acknowledge the duplicates of myself&#8212;the weakest 
  and shallowest is deathless with me; 

What I do and say, the same waits for them;

  Every thought that flounders in me, the same flounders 
  in them.



I know perfectly well my own egotism;
I know my omnivorous lines, and cannot write any less;

  And would fetch you, whoever you are, flush with my-
  self.



No words of routine are mine,

  But abruptly to question, to leap beyond, yet nearer 
  bring: 


  This printed and bound book&#8212;but the printer, and the 
  printing-office boy?





  The well-taken photographs&#8212;but your wife or friend 
  close and solid in your arms?


  The black ship mail'd with iron, her mighty guns in 
  her turrets&#8212;but the pluck of the captain and 
  engineers?


  In the houses, the dishes and fare and furniture&#8212;but 
  the host and hostess, and the look out of their 
  eyes?


  The sky up there&#8212;yet here, or next door, or across the 
  way?

The saints and sages in history&#8212;but you yourself?

  Sermons, creeds, theology&#8212;but the fathomless human 
  brain,

And what is reason? and what is love? and what is life?



43

I do not despise you, priests;

  My faith is the greatest of faiths, and the least of 
  faiths,


  Enclosing worship ancient and modern, and all between 
  ancient and modern,


  Believing I shall come again upon the earth after five 
  thousand years,


  Waiting responses from oracles, honoring the Gods,
  saluting the sun,


  Making a fetish of the first rock or stump, powwowing 
  with sticks in the circle of obis,


  Helping the lama or brahmin as he trims the lamps of 
  the idols,


  Dancing yet through the streets in a phallic proces-
  sion&#8212;rapt and austere in the woods, a gymno-
  sophist,


  Drinking mead from the skull-cup&#8212;to Shastas and 
  Vedas admirant&#8212;minding the Koran,


  Walking the teokallis, spotted with gore from the stone 
  and knife, beating the serpent-skin drum,


  Accepting the Gospels&#8212;accepting him that was cruci-
  fied, knowing assuredly that he is divine,





   To the mass kneeling, or the puritan's prayer rising,
  or sitting patiently in a pew,


  Ranting and frothing in my insane crisis, or waiting 
  dead-like till my spirit arouses me,


  Looking forth on pavement and land, or outside of 
  pavement and land,

Belonging to the winders of the circuit of circuits.



  One of that centripetal and centrifugal gang, I turn 
  and talk like a man leaving charges before a 
  journey.



Down-hearted doubters, dull and excluded,

  Frivolous, sullen, moping, angry, affected, disheart-
  en'd, atheistical; 


  I know every one of you&#8212;I know the sea of torment,
  despair and unbelief.



How the flukes splash!

  How they contort, rapid as lightning, with spasms,
  and spouts of blood!




  Be at peace, bloody flukes of doubters and sullen 
  mopers; 

I take my place among you as much as among any;

  The past is the push of you, me, all, precisely the 
  same,


  And what is yet untried and afterward is for you, me,
  all, precisely the same.



I do not know what is untried and afterward;

  But I know it will in its turn prove sufficient, and can-
  not fail.




  Each who passes is consider'd&#8212;each who stops is 
  consider'd&#8212;not a single one can it fail.







  It cannot fail the young man who died and was 
  buried,


  Nor the young woman who died and was put by his 
  side,


  Nor the little child that peep'd in at the door, and 
  then drew back, and was never seen again,


  Nor the old man who has lived without purpose, and 
  feels it with bitterness worse than gall,


  Nor him in the poor house, turbercled by rum and the 
  bad disorder,


  Nor the numberless slaughter'd and wreck'd&#8212;nor the 
  brutish koboo call'd the ordure of humanity,


  Nor the sacs merely floating with open mouths for 
  food to slip in,


  Nor anything in the earth, or down in the oldest 
  graves of the earth,


  Nor anything in the myriads of spheres&#8212;nor one of 
  the myriads of myriads that inhabit them,

Nor the present&#8212;nor the least wisp that is known.



44

It is time to explain myself&#8212;Let us stand up.


What is known I strip away;

  I launch all men and women forward with me into 
  THE UNKNOWN.




  The clock indicates the moment&#8212;but what does 
  eternity indicate?




  We have thus far exhausted trillions of winters and 
  summers; 

There are trillions ahead, and trillions ahead of them.


Births have brought us richness and variety,
And other births will bring us richness and variety.





I do not call one greater and one smaller;
That which fills its period and place is equal to any.



  Were mankind murderous or jealous upon you, my 
  brother, my sister?


  I am sorry for you&#8212;they are not murderous or jeal-
  ous upon me; 


  All has been gentle with me&#8212;I keep no account with 
  lamentation; 

(What have I to do with lamentation?)



  I am an acme of things accomplish'd, and I an 
  encloser of things to be.



My feet strike an apex of the apices of the stairs;

  On every step bunches of ages, and larger bunches 
  between the steps; 

All below duly travel'd, and still I mount and mount.


Rise after rise bow the phantoms behind me;

  Afar down I see the huge first Nothing&#8212;I know I was 
  even there; 


  I waited unseen and always, and slept through the 
  lethargic mist,


  And took my time, and took no hurt from the fetid 
  carbon.



Long I was hugg'd close&#8212;long and long.


Immense have been the preparations for me,
Faithful and friendly the arms that have help'd me.



  Cycles ferried my cradle, rowing and rowing like 
  cheerful boatmen; 

For room to me stars kept aside in their own rings;

  They sent influences to look after what was to hold 
  me.







  Before I was born out of my mother, generations 
  guided me; 


  My embryo has never been torpid&#8212;nothing could 
  overlay it.



For it the nebula cohered to an orb,
The long slow strata piled to rest it on,
Vast vegetables gave it sustenance,

  Monstrous sauroids transported it in their months,
  and deposited it with care.




  All forces have been steadily employ'd to complete 
  and delight me; 

Now on this spot I stand with my robust Soul.



45

O span of youth! Ever-push't elasticity!
O manhood, balanced, florid, and full.


My lovers suffocate me!
Crowding my lips, thick in the pores of my skin,

  Jostling me through streets and public halls&#8212;coming 
  naked to me at night,


  Crying by day Ahoy! from the rocks of the river&#8212; 
  swinging and chirping over my head,


  Calling my name from flower-beds, vines, tangled 
  under-brush,

Lighting on every moment of my life,
Bussing my body with soft balsamic busses,

  Noiselessly passing handfuls out of their hearts, and 
  giving them to be mine.




  Old age superbly rising! O welcome, ineffable grace 
  of dying days!




  Every condition promulges not only itself&#8212;it pro-
  mulges what grows after and out of itself,

And the dark hush promulges as much as any.






  I open my scuttle at night and see the far-sprinkled 
  systems,


  And all I see, multiplied as high as I can cipher, edge 
  but the rim of the farther systems.




  Wider and wider they spread, expanding, always 
  expanding,

Outward and outward, and forever outward.



  My sun has his sun, and round him obediently 
  wheels,

He joins with his partners a group of superior circuit,

  And greater sets follow, making specks of the greatest 
  inside them.



There is no stoppage, and never can be stoppage;

  If I, you, and the worlds, and all beneath or upon 
  their surfaces, were this moment reduced back 
  to a pallid float, it would not avail in the long run; 


  We should surely bring up again where we now 
  stand,


  And as surely go as much farther&#8212;and then farther 
  and farther.




  A few quadrillions of eras, a few octillions of cubic 
  leagues, do not hazard the span, or make it 
  impatient; 

They are but parts&#8212;anything is but a part.



  See ever so far, there is limitless space outside of 
  that; 


  Count ever so much, there is limitless time around 
  that.



My rendezvous is appointed&#8212;it is certain;

  The Lord will be there, and wait till I come, on perfect 
  terms; 


  (The great Camerado, the lover true for whom I pine,
  will be there.)







46


  I know I have the best of time and space, and was 
  never measured, and never will be measured.



I tramp a perpetual journey&#8212;(come listen all!)

  My signs are a rain-proof coat, good shoes, and a staff 
  cut from the woods; 

No friend of mine takes his ease in my chair;
I have no chair, no church, no philosophy;
I lead no man to a dinner-table, library, or exchange;

  But each man and each woman of you I lead upon a 
  knoll,

My left hand hooking you round the waist,

  My right hand pointing to landscapes of continents,
  and a plain public road.




  Not I&#8212;not any one else, can travel that road for 
  you,

You must travel it for yourself.


It is not far&#8212;it is within reach;

  Perhaps you have been on it since you were born, and 
  did not know; 

Perhaps it is every where on water and on land.



  Shoulder your duds, dear son, and I will mine, and 
  let us hasten forth,


  Wonderful cities and free nations we shall fetch as 
  we go.




  If you tire, give me both burdens, and rest the chuff 
  of your hand on my hip,


  And in due time you shall repay the same service to 
  me; 

For after we start, we never lie by again.






  This day before dawn I ascended a hill, and look'd 
  at the crowded heaven,


  And I said to my Spirit, When we become the enfolders 
  of those orbs, and the pleasure and knowledge of 
  everything in them, shall we be fill'd and satisfied 
  then? 


  And my Spirit said No, we but level that lift, to pass and 
  continue beyond.



You are also asking me questions, and I hear you;

  I answer that I cannot answer&#8212;you must find out for 
  yourself.



Sit a while, dear son;
Here are biscuits to eat, and here is milk to drink;

  But as soon as you sleep, and renew yourself in sweet 
  clothes, I kiss you with a good-bye kiss, and 
  open the gate for your egress hence.




  Long enough have you dream'd contemptible 
  dreams; 

Now I wash the gum from your eyes;

  You must habit yourself to the dazzle of the light,
  and of every moment of your life.




  Long have you timidly waded, holding a plank by 
  the shore; 

Now I will you to be a bold swimmer,

  To jump off in the midst of the sea, rise again, nod 
  to me, shout, and laughingly dash with your 
  hair.




47

I am the teacher of athletes;

  He that by me spreads a wider breast than my own,
  proves the width of my own; 


  He most honors my style who learns under it to 
  destroy the teacher.







  The boy I love, the same becomes a man, not 
  through derived power, but in his own right,


  Wicked, rather than virtuous out of conformity or 
  fear,

Fond of his sweetheart, relishing well his steak,

  Unrequited love, or a slight, cutting him worse than 
  sharp steel cuts,


  First-rate to ride, to fight, to hit the bull's-eye, to sail 
  a skiff, to sing a song, or play on the banjo,


  Preferring scars, and the beard, and faces pitted with 
  small-pox, over all latherers,

And those well tann'd to those that keep out of the sun.



  I teach straying from me&#8212;yet who can stray from 
  me?


  I follow you, whoever you are, from the present 
  hour; 

My words itch at your ears till you understand them.



  I do not say these things for a dollar, or to fill up 
  the time while I wait for a boat; 


  It is you talking just as much as myself&#8212;I act as the 
  tongue of you; 

Tied in your mouth, in mine it begins to be loosen'd.



  I swear I will never again mention love or death in-
  side a house,


  And I swear I will never translate myself at all, only 
  to him or her who privately stays with me in 
  the open air.




  If you would understand me, go to the heights or 
  water-shore; 


  The nearest gnat is an explanation, and a drop or mo-
  tion of waves a key; 

The maul, the oar, the hand-saw, second my words.





No shutter'd room or school can commune with me,
But roughs and little children better than they.



  The young mechanic is closest to me&#8212;he knows me 
  well; 


  The woodman, that takes his axe and jug with him,
  shall take me with him all day; 


  The farm-boy, ploughing in the field, feels good at the 
  sound of my voice; 


  In vessels that sail, my words sail&#8212;I go with fisher-
  men and seamen, and love them.



The soldier camp'd, or upon the march, is mine;

  On the night ere the pending battle, many seek me,
  and I do not fail them; 


  On the solemn night (it may be their last,) those that 
  know me, seek me.




  My face rubs to the hunter's face, when he lies down 
  alone in his blanket; 


  The driver, thinking of me, does not mind the jolt of 
  his wagon; 

The young mother and old mother comprehend me;

  The girl and the wife rest the needle a moment, and 
  forget where they are; 

They and all would resume what I have told them.



48

I have said that the soul is not more than the body,
And I have said that the body is not more than the soul:

  And nothing, not God, is greater to one than one's 
  self is,


  And whoever walks a furlong without sympathy, walks 
  to his own funeral, drest in his shroud,


  And I or you, pocketless of a dime, may purchase the 
  pick of the earth,





  And to glance with an eye, or show a bean in its pod,
  confounds the learning of all times,


  And there is no trade or employment but the young 
  man following it may become a hero,


  And there is no object so soft but it makes a hub for 
  the wheel'd universe,


  And I say to any man or woman, Let your soul stand 
  cool and composed before a million universes.



And I say to mankind, Be not curious about God,

  For I, who am curious about each, am not curious 
  about God; 


  (No array of terms can say how much I am at peace 
  about God, and about death.)




  I hear and behold God in every object, yet under-
  stand God not in the least,


  Nor do I understand who there can be more wonder-
  ful than myself.



Why should I wish to see God better than this day?

  I see something of God each hour of the twenty-four,
  and each moment then; 


  In the faces of men and women I see God, and in my 
  own face in the glass; 


  I find letters from God drop't in the street&#8212;and every 
  one is sign'd by God's name,


  And I leave them where they are, for I know that 
  wheresoe'er I go,

Others will punctually come forever and ever.



49


  And as to you Death, and you bitter hug of mor-
  tality, it is idle to try to alarm me.




  To his work without flinching the accoucheur 
  comes; 

I see the elder hand, pressing, receiving, supporting;
I recline by the sills of the exquisite flexible doors,
And mark the outlet, and mark the relief and escape.






  And as to you, Corpse, I think you are good man-
  nure&#8212;but that does not offend me; 

I smell the white roses sweet-scented and growing,

  I reach to the leafy lips&#8212;I reach to the polish't breasts 
  of melons.




  And as to you Life, I reckon you are the leavings of 
  many deaths; 


  (No doubt I have died myself ten thousand times 
  before.)



I hear you whispering there, O stars of heaven;

  O suns! O grass of graves! O perpetual transfers and 
  promotions!

If you do not say anything, how can I say anything.


Of the turbid pool that lies in the autumn forest,

  Of the moon that descends the steeps of the soughing 
  twilight,


  Toss, sparkles of day and dusk! toss on the black 
  stems that decay in the muck!

Toss to the moaning gibberish of the dry limbs.


I ascend from the moon, I ascend from the night;

  I perceive that the ghastly glimmer is noonday sun-
  beams reflected; 
    

  And debouch to the steady and central from the off-
  spring great or small.




50


  There is that in me&#8212;I do not know what it is&#8212;but 
  I know it is in me.




  Wrench't and sweaty&#8212;calm and cool then my body 
  becomes; 

I sleep&#8212;I sleep long.



  I do not know it&#8212;it is without name&#8212;it is a word 
  unsaid; 

It is not in any dictionary, utterance, symbol.






  Something it swings on more than the earth I swing 
  on; 


  To it the creation is the friend whose embracing awakes 
  me.




  Perhaps I might tell more. Outlines! I plead for 
  my brothers and sisters.



Do you see, O my brothers and sisters?

  It is not chaos or death&#8212;it is form, union, plan&#8212;it is 
  eternal life&#8212;it is HAPPINESS.




  The past and present wilt&#8212;I have fill'd them, emp-
  tied them,

And proceed to fill my next fold of the future.



51


  Listener up there! Here you! What have you to 
  confide to me?

Look in my face, while I snuff the sidle of evening;

  Talk honestly&#8212;no one else hears you, and I stay only 
  a minute longer.



Do I contradict myself?
Very well, then, I contradict myself;
I am large&#8212;I contain multitudes.



  I concentrate toward them that are nigh&#8212;I wait on 
  the door-slab.




  Who has done his day's work? Who will soonest be 
  through with his supper?

Who wishes to walk with me?



  Will you speak before I am gone? Will you prove 
  already too late?




52


  The spotted hawk swoops by and accuses me&#8212;he 
  complains of my gab and my loitering.






I too am not a bit tamed&#8212;I too am untranslatable;
I sound my barbaric yawp over the roofs of the world.


The last scud of day holds back for me;

  It flings my likeness after the rest, and true as any, on 
  the shadow'd wilds; 

It coaxes me to the vapor and the dusk.



  I depart as air&#8212;I shake my white locks at the run-
  away sun; 

I effuse my flesh in eddies, and drift it in lacy jags.



  I bequeathe myself to the dirt, to grow from the 
  grass I love; 

If you want me again, look for me under your boot-soles.


You will hardly know who I am, or what I mean;
But I shall be good health to you nevertheless,
And filter and fibre your blood.


Failing to fetch me at first, keep encouraged;
Missing me one place, search another;
I stop somewhere, waiting for you.









CHILDREN OF ADAM.


TO THE GARDEN, THE WORLD.
 To THE garden, the world, anew ascending,
Potent mates, daughters, sons, preluding,
The love, the life of their bodies, meaning and being,
Curious, here behold my resurrection, after slumber;

  The revolving cycles, in their wide sweep, having 
  brought me again,

Amorous, mature&#8212;all beautiful to me&#8212;all wondrous;

  My limbs, and the quivering fire that ever plays through 
  them, for reasons, most wondrous; 

Existing, I peer and penetrate still,
Content with the present&#8212;content with the past,
By my side, or back of me, Eve following,
Or in front, and I following her just the same.



FROM PENT-UP ACHING RIVERS.
 FROM pent-up, aching rivers;
From that of myself, without which I were nothing;

  From what I am determin'd to make illustrious, even 
  if I stand sole among men; 

From my own voice resonant&#8212;singing the phallus,
Singing the song of procreation,




  Singing the need of superb children, and therein superb 
  grown people,

Singing the muscular urge and the blending,
Singing the bedfellow's song, (O resistless yearning!
O for any and each, the body correlative attracting!

  O for you, whoever you are, your correlative body! O 
  it, more than all else, you delighting!)

&#8212;From the hungry gnaw that eats me night and day;

  From native moments&#8212;from bashful pains&#8212;singing 
  them; 


  Singing something yet unfound, though I have dili-
  gently sought it, many a long year; 

Singing the true song of the Soul, fitful, at random;

  Singing what, to the Soul, entirely redeem'd her, the 
  faithful one, even the prostitute, who detain'd 
  me when I went to the city; 

Singing the song of prostitutes;
Renascent with grossest Nature, or among animals;

  Of that&#8212;of them, and what goes with them, my poems 
  informing; 


  Of the smell of apples and lemons&#8212;of the pairing of 
  birds,

Of the wet of woods&#8212;of the lapping of waves,

  Of the mad pushes of waves upon the land&#8212;I them 
  chanting; 


  The overture lightly sounding&#8212;the strain anticipat-
  ing; 

The welcome nearness&#8212;the sight of the perfect body;

  The swimmer swimming naked in the bath, or motion-
  less on his back lying and floating; 


  The female form approaching&#8212;I, pensive, love-flesh 
  tremulous, aching; 


  &#8212;The slave's body for sale,&#8212;I, sternly, with harsh 
  voice, auctioneering; 


  The divine list, for myself or you, or for any one, mak-
  ing; 


  The face&#8212;the limbs&#8212;the index from head to foot, and 
  what it arouses; 





  The mystic deliria&#8212;the madness amorous&#8212;the utter 
  abandonment; 

(Hark close, and still, what I now whisper to you,
I love you&#8212;O you entirely possess me,

  O I wish that you and I escape from the rest, and go 
  utterly off&#8212;O free and lawless,


  Two hawks in the air&#8212;two fishes swimming in the sea 
  not more lawless than we;)


  &#8212;The furious storm through me careering&#8212;I passion-
  ately trembling; 


  The oath of the inseparableness of two together&#8212;of 
  the woman that loves me, and whom I love more 
  than my life&#8212;that oath swearing; 

(O I willingly stake all, for you!
O let me be lost, if it must be so!

  O you and I&#8212;what is it to us what the rest do or 
  think?


  What is all else to us? only that we enjoy each other,
  and exhaust each other, if it must be so;)

&#8212;From the master&#8212;the pilot I yield the vessel to;

  The general commanding me, commanding all&#8212;from 
  him permission taking; 


  From time the programme hastening, (I have loiter'd 
  too long, as to is;)

From sex&#8212;From the warp and from the woof;
(To talk to the perfect girl who understands me,

  To waft to her these from my own lips&#8212;to effuse them 
  from my own body;)

From privacy&#8212;from frequent repinings alone;

  From plenty of persons near, and yet the right person 
  not near; 


  From the soft sliding of hands over me, and thrusting 
  of fingers through my hair and beard; 

From the long sustain'd kiss upon the mouth or bosom;

  From the close pressure that makes me or any man 
  drunk, fainting with excess; 


  From what the divine husband knows&#8212;from the work 
  of fatherhood; 





  From exultation, victory, and relief&#8212;from the bedfel-
  low's embrace in the night; 

From the act-poems of eyes, hands, hips, and bosoms,
From the cling of the trembling arm,
From the bending curve and the clinch,
From side by side, the pliant coverlid off-throwing,

  From the one so unwilling to have me leave&#8212;and me 
  just as unwilling to leave,

(Yet a moment, O tender waiter, and I return;)
&#8212;From the hour of shining stars and dropping dews,
From the night, a moment, I, emerging, flitting out,

  Celebrate you, act divine&#8212;and you, children prepared 
  for,

And you, stalwart loins.





I SING THE BODY ELECTRIC.

1


I SING the Body electric;

  The armies of those I love engirth me, and I engirth 
  them; 


  They will not let me off till I go with them, respond 
  to them,


  And discorrupt them, and charge them full with the 
  charge of the Soul.




  Was it doubted that those who corrupt their own 
  bodies conceal themselves?


  And if those who defile the living are as bad as they 
  who defile the dead?

And if the body does not do as much as the Soul?
And if the body were not the Soul, what is the Soul?






2


  The love of the Body of man or woman balks ac-
  count&#8212;the body itself balks account; 


  That of the male is perfect, and that of the female is 
  perfect.



The expression of the face balks account;

  But the expression of a well-made man appears not 
  only in his face; 


  It is in his limbs and joints also, it is curiously in the 
  joints of his hips and wrists; 


  It is in his walk, the carriage of his neck, the flex of 
  his waist and knees&#8212;dress does not hide him; 


  The strong, sweet, supple quality he has, strikes 
  through the cotton and flannel; 


  To see him pass conveys as much as the best poem,
  perhaps more; 


  You linger to see his back, and the back of his neck 
  and shoulder-side.


              
  The sprawl and fulness of babes, the bosoms and 
  heads of women, the folds of their dress, their 
  style as we pass in the street, the contour of 
  their shape downwards,


  The swimmer naked in the swimming bath, seen as he 
  swims through the transparent green-shine, or 
  lies with his face up, and rolls silently to and 
  fro in the heave of the water,


  The bending forward and backward of rowers in row-
  boats&#8212;the horseman in his saddle,


  Girls, mothers, house-keepers, in all their perform-
  ances,


  The group of laborers seated at noon-time with their 
  open dinner-kettles, and their wives waiting,


  The female soothing a child&#8212;the farmer's daughter in 
  the garden or cow-yard,


  The young fellow hoeing corn&#8212;the sleigh-driver 
  guiding his six horses through the crowd,
                            
  The wrestle of wrestlers, two apprentice-boys, quite 
  grown, lusty, good-natured, native-born, out on 
  the vacant lot at sun-down, after work,


  The coats and caps thrown down, the embrace of love 
  and resistance,


  The upper-hold and under-hold, the hair rumpled 
  over and blinding the eyes; 


  The march of firemen in their own costumes, the play 
  of masculine muscle through clean-setting 
  trowsers and waist-straps,


  The slow return from the fire, the pause when the bell 
  strikes suddenly again, and the listening on the 
  alert,


  The natural, perfect, varied attitudes&#8212;the bent head,
  the curv'd neck, and the counting; 


  Such-like I love&#8212;I loosen myself, pass freely, am at 
  the mother's breast with the little child,


  Swim with the swimmers, wrestle with wrestlers, march 
  in line with the firemen, and pause, listen,
  and count.




3
              
  I knew a man, a common farmer&#8212;the father of 
  five sons; 


  And in them were the fathers of sons&#8212;and in them 
  were the fathers of sons.


              
  This man was of wonderful vigor, calmness, beauty 
  of person; 


  The shape of his head, the richness and breadth of 
  his manners, the pale yellow and white of his 
  hair and beard, and the immeasurable meaning 
  of his black eyes,


  These I used to go and visit him to see&#8212;he was wise 
  also; 


  He was six feet tall, he was over eighty years old&#8212;his 
  sons were massive, clean, bearded, tan-faced,
  handsome; 
                            
  They and his daughters loved him&#8212;all who saw him 
  loved him; 


  They did not love him by allowance&#8212;they loved him 
  with personal love; 


  He drank water only&#8212;the blood show'd like scarlet 
  through the clear-brown skin of his face; 


  He was a frequent gunner and fisher&#8212;he sail'd his 
  boat himself&#8212;he had a fine one presented to 
  him by a ship-joiner&#8212;he had fowling-pieces,
  presented to him by men that loved him; 


  When he went with his five sons and many grand-sons 
  to hunt or fish, you would pick him out as the 
  most beautiful and vigorous of the gang,


  You would wish long and long to be with him&#8212;you 
  would wish to sit by him in the boat, that you 
  and he might touch each other.




4


  I have perceiv'd that to be with those I like is 
  enough,


  To stop in company with the rest at evening is 
  enough,


  To be surrounded by beautiful, curious, breathing,
  laughing flesh is enough,


  To pass among them, or touch any one, or rest my 
  arm ever so lightly round his or her neck for a 
  moment&#8212;what is this then?


  I do not ask any more delight&#8212;I swim in it, as in a 
  sea.




  There is something in staying close to men and wo-
  men, and looking on them, and in the contact 
  and odor of them, that pleases the soul well; 


  All things please the soul&#8212;but these please the soul 
  well.



            
5

This is the female form;
A divine nimbus exhales from it from head to foot;



It attracts with fierce undeniable attraction!

  I am drawn by its breath as if I were no more than a 
  helpless vapor&#8212;all falls aside but myself and it; 


  Books, art, religion, time, the visible and solid earth,
  the atmosphere and the clouds, and what was 
  expected of heaven or fear'd of hell, are now 
  consumed; 


  Mad filaments, ungovernable shoots play out of it, the 
  response likewise ungovernable!


  Hair, bosom, hips, bend of legs, negligent falling 
  hands, all diffused&#8212;mine too diffused; 


  Ebb stung by the flow, and flow stung by the ebb&#8212; 
  love-flesh swelling and deliciously aching; 


  Limitless limpid jets of love hot and enormous,
  quivering jelly of love, white-blow and deliri-
  ous juice; 


  Bridegroom night of love, working surely and softly 
  into the prostrate dawn; 

Undulating into the willing and yielding day,

  Lost in the cleave of the clasping and sweet-flesh'd 
  day.


              
  This is the nucleus&#8212;after the child is born of 
  woman, the man is born of woman; 


  This is the bath of birth&#8212;this is the merge of small 
  and large, and the outlet again.


              
  Be not ashamed, women&#8212;your privilege encloses 
  the rest, and is the exit of the rest,


  You are the gates of the body, and you are the gates 
  of the soul.


              
  The female contains all qualities, and tempers them 
  &#8212;she is in her place, and moves with perfect 
  balance; 


  She is all things duly veil'd&#8212;she is both passive and 
  active; 


  She is to conceive daughters as well as sons, and sons 
  as well as daughters.






As I see my soul reflected in nature;

  As I see through a mist, one with inexpressible com-
  pleteness and beauty,


  See the bent head, and arms folded over the breast&#8212; 
  the female I see.




6
              
  The male is not less the soul, nor more&#8212;he too is 
  in his place; 

He too is all qualities&#8212;he is action and power;
The flush of the known universe is in him;

  Scorn becomes him well, and appetite and defiance 
  become him well; 


  The wildest largest passions, bliss that is utmost, sor-
  row that is utmost, become him well&#8212;pride is 
  for him; 


  The full-spread pride of man is calming and excellent 
  to the soul; 


  Knowledge becomes him&#8212;he likes it always&#8212;he 
  brings everything to the test of himself; 


  Whatever the survey, whatever the sea and the sail, he 
  strikes soundings at last only here; 

Where else does he strike soundings, except here?

              
  The man's body is sacred, and the woman's body is 
  sacred; 

No matter who it is, it is sacred;

  Is it a slave? Is it one of the dull-faced immigrants 
  just landed on the wharf?


  Each belongs here or anywhere, just as much as the 
  well-off&#8212;just as much as you; 

Each has his or her place in the procession.

              All is a procession;

  The universe is a procession, with measured and beau-
  tiful motion.







  Do you know so much yourself, that you call the slave 
  or the dull-face ignorant?


  Do you suppose you have a right to a good sight, and 
  he or she has no right to a sight?


  Do you think matter has cohered together from its 
  diffuse float&#8212;and the soil is on the surface,
  and water runs, and vegetation sprouts,

For you only, and not for him and her?



7

A man's Body at auction;

  I help the auctioneer&#8212;the sloven does not half know 
  his business.



Gentlemen, look on this wonder!

  Whatever the bids of the bidders, they cannot be high 
  enough for it; 


  For it the globe lay preparing quintillions of years,
  without one animal or plant; 

For it the revolving cycles truly and steadily roll'd.


In this head the all-baffling brain;
In it and below it, the makings of heroes.



  Examine these limbs, red, black, or white&#8212;they are 
  so cunning in tendon and nerve; 

They shall be stript, that you may see them.


Exquisite senses, life-lit eyes, pluck, volition,

  Flakes of breast-muscle, pliant back-bone and neck,
  flesh not flabby, good sized arms and legs,

And wonders within there yet.


Within there runs blood,
The same old blood!
The same red-running blood!

  There swells and jets a heart&#8212;there all passions, de-
  sires, reachings, aspirations; 


  Do you think they are not there because they are not 
  express'd in parlors and lecture&#8212;rooms?





              
  This is not only one man&#8212;this is the father of those 
  who shall be fathers in their turns; 

In him the start of populous states and rich republics;

  Of him countless immortal lives, with countless em-
  bodiments and enjoyments.


              
  How do you know who shall come from the off-
  spring of his offspring through the centuries?


  Who might you find you have come from yourself, if 
  you could trace back through the centuries?




8

A woman's Body at auction!

  She too is not only herself&#8212;she is the teeming 
  mother of mothers; 


  She is the bearer of them that shall grow and be 
  mates to the mothers.



Have you ever loved the Body of a woman?
Have you ever loved the Body of a man?
Your father&#8212;where is your father?

  Your mother&#8212;is she living? have you been much 
  with her? and has she been much with you?


  Do you not see that these are exactly the same to all,
  in all nations and times, all over the earth?



If any thing is sacred, the human body is sacred,

  And the glory and sweet of a man, is the token of man-
  hood untainted; 


  And in man or woman, a clean, strong, firm-fibred 
  body, is beautiful as the most beautiful face.


              
  Have you seen the fool that corrupted his own live 
  body? or the fool that corrupted her own live 
  body?


  For they do not conceal themselves, and cannot con-
  ceal themselves.







9
              
  O my Body! I dare not desert the likes of you in 
  other men and women, nor the likes of the 
  parts of you; 


  I believe the likes of you are to stand or fall with the 
  likes of the Soul, (and that they are the Soul;)


  I believe the likes of you shall stand or fall with my 
  poems&#8212;and that they are poems,


  Man's, woman's, child's, youth's, wife's, husband's,
  mother's, father's, young man's, young woman's 
  poems; 

Head, neck, hair, ears, drop and tympan of the ears,

  Eyes, eye-fringes, iris of the eye, eye-brows, and the 
  waking or sleeping of the lids,


  Mouth, tongue, lips, teeth, roof of the mouth, jaws,
  and the jaw-hinges,

Nose, nostrils of the nose, and the partition,

  Cheeks, temples, forehead, chin, throat, back of the 
  neck, neck-slue,


  Strong shoulders, manly beard, scapula, hind-shoul-
  ders, and the ample side-round of the chest,


  Upper-arm, arm-pit, elbow-socket, lower-arm, arm-
  sinews, arm-bones,


  Wrist and wrist-joints, hand, palm, knuckles, thumb,
  fore-finger, finger-balls, finger-joints, finger-
  nails,


  Broad breast-front, curling hair of the breast, breast-
  bone, breast-side,

Ribs, belly, backbone, joints of the back-bone,

  Hips, hip-sockets, hip-strength, inward and outward 
  round, man-balls, man-root,

Strong set of thighs, well carrying the trunk above,
Leg-fibres, knee, knee-pan, upper-leg, under-leg,
Ankles, instep, foot-ball, toes, toe-joints, the heel;

  All attitudes, all the shapeliness, all the belongings of 
  my or your body, or of any one's body, male or 
  female,
                            
  The lung-sponges, the stomach-sac, the bowels sweet 
  and clean,

The brain in its folds inside the skull-frame,

  Sympathies, heart-valves, palate-valves, sexuality, ma-
  ternity,


  Womanhood, and all that is a woman&#8212;and the man 
  that comes from woman,


  The womb, the teats, nipples, breast-milk, tears, laugh-
  ter, weeping, love-looks, love-perturbations and 
  risings,


  The voice, articulation, language, whispering, shout-
  ing aloud,


  Food, drink, pulse, digestion, sweat, sleep, walking,
  swimming,


  Poise on the hips, leaping, reclining, embracing, arm-
  curving and tightening,


  The continual changes of the flex of the mouth, and 
  around the eyes,

The skin, the sun-burnt shade, freckles, hair,

  The curious sympathy one feels, when feeling with the 
  hand the naked meat of the body,


  The circling rivers, the breath, and breathing it in 
  and out,


  The beauty of the waist, and thence of the hips, and 
  thence downward toward the knees,


  The thin red jellies within you, or within me&#8212;the 
  bones, and the marrow in the bones,

The exquisite realization of health;

  O I say, these are not the parts and poems of the Body 
  only, but of the Soul,

O I say now these are the Soul!








A WOMAN WAITS FOR ME.

              A WOMAN waits for me&#8212;she contains all, nothing is 
  lacking,


  Yet all were lacking, if sex were lacking, or if the 
  moisture of the right man were lacking.



Sex contains all,

  Bodies, Souls, meanings, proofs, purities, delicacies,
  results, promulgations,


  Songs, commands, health, pride, the maternal mystery,
  the semitic milk,

All hopes, benefactions, bestowals,

  All the passions, loves, beauties, delights of the 
  earth,


  All the governments, judges, gods, follow'd persons of 
  the earth,


  These are contain'd in sex, as parts of itself, and jus-
  tifications of itself.




  Without shame the man I like knows and avows the 
  deliciousness of his sex,


  Without shame the woman I like knows and avows 
  hers.



Now I will dismiss myself from impassive women,

  I will go stay with her who waits for me, and with 
  those women that are warm-blooded and suffi-
  cient for me: 

I see that they understand me, and do not deny me:

  I see that they are worthy of me&#8212;I will be the robust 
  husband of those women.



They are not one jot less than I am,

  They are tann'd in the face by shining suns and 
  blowing winds,

Their flesh has the old divine suppleness and strength,




  They know how to swim, row, ride, wrestle, shoot, run,
  strike, retreat, advance, resist, defend them-
  selves,


  They are ultimate in their own right&#8212;they are calm,
  clear, well-possess'd of themselves.



I draw you close to me, you women!
I cannot let you go, I would do you good,

  I am for you, and you are for me, not only for our 
  own sake, but for others' sakes; 

Evelop'd in you sleep greater heroes and bards,
They refuse to awake at the touch of any man but me:


It is I, you women&#8212;I make my way,
I am stern, acrid, large, undissuadable&#8212;but I love you,
I do not hurt you any more than is necessary for you,

  I pour the stuff to start sons and daughters fit for 
  These States&#8212;I press with slow rude muscle,

I brace myself effectually&#8212;I listen to no entreaties,

  I dare not withdraw till I deposit what has so long 
  accumulated within me.



Through you I drain the pent-up rivers of myself,
In you I wrap a thousand onward years,

  On you I graft the grafts of the best-beloved of me 
  and America,


  The drops I distil upon you shall grow fierce and ath-
  letic girls, new artists, musicians, and singers,


  The babes I beget upon you are to beget babes in 
  their turn,


  I shall demand perfect men and women out of my 
  love-spendings,


  I shall expect them to interpenetrate with others, as I 
  and you interpenetrate now,


  I shall count on the fruits of the gushing showers of 
  them, as I count on the fruits of the gushing 
  showers I give now,


  I shall look for loving crops from the birth, life, death,
  immortality, I plant so lovingly now.








SPONTANEOUS ME

SPONTANEOUS me, Nature,
    
     The loving day, the mounting sun, the friend I am 
  happy with,

The arm of my friend hanging idly over my shoulder,

  The hill-side whiten'd with blossoms of the mountain 
  ash,


  The same, late in autumn&#8212;the hues of red, yellow,
  drab, purple, and light and dark green,


  The rich coverlid of the grass&#8212;animals and birds&#8212; 
  the private untrimm'd bank&#8212;the primitive 
  apples&#8212;the pebble-stones,


  Beautiful dripping fragments&#8212;the negligent list of 
  one after another, as I happen to call them to 
  me, or think of them,


  The real poems, (what we call poems being merely 
  pictures,)


  The poems of the privacy of the night, and of men 
  like me,


  This poem, drooping shy and unseen, that I always 
  carry, and that all men carry,


  (Know, once for all, avow'd on purpose, wherever are 
  men like me, are our lusty, lurking, masculine 
  poems;)


  Love-thoughts, love-juice, love-odor, love-yielding,
  love-climbers, and the climbing sap,


  Arms and hands of love&#8212;lips of love&#8212;phallic thumb 
  of love&#8212;breasts of love&#8212;bellies press'd and 
  glued together with love,

Earth of chaste love&#8212;life that is only life after love,

  The body of my love&#8212;the body of the woman I 
  love&#8212;the body of the man&#8212;the body of the 
  earth,

Soft forenoon airs that blow from the south-west,




  The hairy wild-bee that murmurs and hankers up and 
  down&#8212;that gripes the full-grown lady-flower,
  curves upon her with amorous firm legs, takes 
  his will of her, and holds himself tremulous 
  and tight till he is satisfied,

The wet of woods through the early hours,

  Two sleepers at night lying close together as they 
  sleep, one with an arm slanting down across 
  and below the waist of the other,


  The smell of apples, aromas from crush'd sage-plant,
  mint, birch-bark,


  The boy's longings, the glow and pressure as he con-
  fides to me what he was dreaming,


  The dead leaf whirling its spiral whirl, and falling 
  still and content to the ground,


  The no-form'd stings that sights, people, objects, sting 
  me with,


  The hubb'd sting of myself, stinging me as much as it 
  ever can any one,


  The sensitive, orbic, underlapp'd brothers, that only 
  privileged feelers may be intimate where they 
  are,


  The curious roamer, the hand, roaming all over the 
  body&#8212;the bashful withdrawing of flesh where 
  the fingers soothingly pause and edge them-
  selves,

The limpid liquid within the young man,
The vexed corrosion, so pensive and so painful,
The torment&#8212;the irritable tide that will not be at rest,

  The like of the same I feel&#8212;the like of the same in 
  others,


  The young man that flushes and flushes, and the 
  young woman that flushes and flushes,


  The young man that wakes, deep at night, the hot 
  hand seeking to repress what would master 
  him; 


  The mystic amorous night&#8212;the strange half-welcome 
  pangs, visions, sweats,





  The pulse pounding through palms and trembling 
  encircling fingers&#8212;the young man all color'd,
  red, ashamed, angry; 


  The souse upon me of my lover the sea, as I lie willing 
  and naked,


  The merriment of the twin-babes that crawl over the 
  grass in the sun, the mother never turning her 
  vigilant eyes from them,


  The walnut-trunk, the walnut-husks, and the ripening 
  or ripen'd long-round walnuts; 

The continence of vegetables, birds, animals,

  The consequent meanness of me should I skulk or find 
  myself indecent, while birds and animals never 
  once skulk or find themselves indecent; 


  The great chastity of paternity, to match the great 
  chastity of maternity,


  The oath of procreation I have sworn&#8212;my Adamic 
  and fresh daughters,


  The greed that eats me day and night with hungry 
  gnaw, till I saturate what shall produce boys to 
  fill my place when I am through,

The wholesome relief, repose, content;
And this bunch, pluck'd at random from myself;

  It has done its work&#8212;I toss it carelessly to fall where 
  it may.




ONE HOUR TO MADNESS AND JOY

ONE hour to madness and joy!
O furious! O confine me not!
(What is this that frees me so in storms?

  What do my shouts amid lightnings and raging winds 
  mean?)







  O to drink the mystic deliria deeper than any 
  other man!

O savage and tender achings!
(I bequeath them to you, my children,

  I tell them to you, for reasons, O bridegroom and 
  bride.)




  O to be yielded to you, whoever you are, and you to 
  be yielded to me, in defiance of the world!

O to return to Paradise! O bashful and feminine!

  O to draw you to me&#8212;to plant on you for the first 
  time the lips of a determin'd man!




  O the puzzle&#8212;the thrice-tied knot&#8212;the deep and 
  dark pool! O all untied and illumin'd!


  O to speed where there is space enough and air 
  enough at last!


  O to be absolv'd from previous ties and conventions&#8212; 
  I from mine, and you from yours!


  O to find a new unthought-of nonchalance with the 
  best of nature!

O to have the gag remov'd from one's mouth!

  O to have the feeling, to-day or any day, I am suffi-
  cient as I am!



O something unprov'd! something in a trance!
O madness amorous! O trembling!
O to escape utterly from others' anchors and holds!

  To drive free! to love free! to dash reckless and dan-
  gerous!

To court destruction with taunts&#8212;with invitations!

  To ascend&#8212;to leap to the heavens of the love indicated 
  to me!

To rise thither with my inebriate Soul!
To be lost, if it must be so!

  To feed the remainder of life with one hour of fulness 
  and freedom!

With one brief hour of madness and joy.







WE TWO&#8212;HOW LONG WE WERE FOOL'D.
 WE two&#8212;how long we were fool'd!
Now transmuted, we swiftly escape, as Nature escapes;

  We are Nature&#8212;long have we been absent, but now 
  we return; 

We become plants, leaves, foliage, roots, bark;
We are bedded in the ground&#8212;we are rocks;
We are oaks&#8212;we grow in the openings side by side;

  We browse&#8212;we are two among the wild herds, spon-
  taneous as any; 

We are two fishes swimming in the sea together;

  We are what the locust blossoms are&#8212;we drop scent 
  around the lanes, mornings and evenings; 


  We are also the coarse smut of beats, vegetables,
  minerals; 


  We are two predatory hawks&#8212;we soar above, and look 
  down; 


  We are two resplendent suns&#8212;we it is who balance 
  ourselves, orbic and stellar&#8212;we are as two 
  comets; 


  We prowl fang'd and four-footed in the woods&#8212;we 
  spring on prey; 


  We are two clouds, forenoons and afternoons, driving 
  overhead; 


  We are seas mingling&#8212;we are two of those cheerful 
  waves, rolling over each other, and interwetting 
  each other; 


  We are what the atmosphere is, transparent, receptive,
  pervious, impervious; 


  We are snow, rain, cold, darkness&#8212;we are each pro-
  duct and influence of the globe; 


  We have circled and circled till we have arrived home 
  again&#8212;we two have; 


  We have voided all but freedom, and all but our own 
  joy.







NATIVE MOMENTS.

  NATIVE moments! when you come upon me&#8212;Ah you 
  are here now!

Give me now libidinous joys only!

  Give me the drench of my passions! Give me life 
  coarse and rank!

To-day, I go consort with nature's darlings&#8212;to-night too;

  I am for those who believe in loose delights&#8212;I share 
  the midnight orgies of young men; 

I dance with the dancers, and drink with the drinkers;
The echoes ring with our indecent calls;

  I take for my love some prostitute&#8212;I pick out some 
  low person for my dearest friend,


  He shall be lawless, rude, illiterate&#8212;he shall be one 
  condemn'd by others for deeds done; 


  I will play a part no longer&#8212;Why should I exile my-
  self from my companions?

O you shunn'd persons! I at least do not shun you,
I come forthwith in your midst&#8212;I will be your poet,
I will be more to you than to any of the rest.



ONCE I PASS'D THROUGH A POPULOUS CITY.

  ONCE I pass'd through a populous city, imprinting my 
  brain, for future use, with its shows, architec-
  ture, customs, and traditions; 


  Yet now, of all that city, I remember only a woman I 
  casually met there, who detain'd me for love of 
  me; 


  Day by day and night by night we were together,&#8212;All 
  else has long been forgotten by me; 


  I remember, I say, only that woman who passionately 
  clung to me; 

Again we wander&#8212;we love&#8212;we separate again;
Again she holds me by the hand&#8212;I must not go!

  I see her close beside me, with silent lips, sad and 
  tremulous.







FACING WEST FROM CALIFORNIA'S SHORES.

FACING west, from California's shores,
Inquiring, tireless, seeking what is yet unfound,

  I, a child, very old, over waves, towards the house of 
  maternity, the land of migrations, look afar,


  Look off the shores of my Western Sea&#8212;the circle 
  almost circled; 


  For, starting westward from Hindustan, from the vales 
  of Kashmere,


  From Asia&#8212;from the north&#8212;from the God, the sage,
  and the hero,


  From the south&#8212;from the flowery peninsulas, and the 
  spice islands; 


  Long having wander'd since&#8212;round the earth having 
  wander'd,

Now I face home again&#8212;very pleas'd and joyous;
(But where is what I started for, so long ago?
And why is it yet unfound?)



AGES AND AGES, RETURNING AT INTERVALS.

AGES and ages, returning at intervals,
Undestroy'd, wandering immortal,

  Lusty, phallic, with the potent original loins, perfectly 
  sweet,

I, chanter of Adamic songs,

  Through the new garden, the West, the great cities 
  calling,


  Deliriate, thus prelude what is generated, offering these,
  offering myself,

Bathing myself, bathing my songs in Sex,
Offspring of my loins.






O HYMEN! O HYMENEE.

O HYMEN! O Hymenee!
Why do you tantalize me thus?
O why sting me for a swift moment only?
Why can you not continue? O why do you now cease?

  Is it because, if you continued beyond the swift mo-
  ment, you would soon certainly kill me?




I AM HE THAT ACHES WITH LOVE.

I AM he that aches with amorous love;

  Does the earth gravitate? Does not all matter,
  aching, attract all matter?

So the Body of me, to all I meet, or know.



AS ADAM, EARLY IN THE MORNING.
 As Adam, early in the morning,
Walking forth from the bower, refresh'd with sleep;
Behold me where I pass&#8212;hear my voice&#8212;approach,

  Touch me&#8212;touch the palm of your hand to my Body 
  as I pass; 

Be not afraid of my Body.







EXCELSIOR.

WHO has gone farthest? For I swear I will go farther;

  And who has been just? For I would be the most just 
  person of the earth; 


  And who most cautious? For I would be more 
  cautious; 


  And who has been happiest? O I think it is I! I 
  think no one was ever happier than I; 


  And who has lavish'd all? For I lavish constantly the 
  best I have; 

And who has been firmest? For I would be firmer;

  And who proudest? For I think I have reason to be 
  the proudest son alive&#8212;for I am the son of the 
  brawny and tall-topt city; 


  And who has been bold and true? For I would be 
  the boldest and truest being of the universe; 


  And who benevolent? For I would show more be-
  nevolence than all the rest; 


  And who has projected beautiful words through the 
  longest time? By God! I will outvie him! I 
  will say such words, they shall stretch through 
  longer time!


  And who has receiv'd the love of the most friends?
  For I know what it is to receive the passionate 
  love of many friends; 


  And to whom has been given the sweetest from 
  women, and paid them in kind? For I will 
  take the like sweets and pay them in kind; 


  And who possesses a perfect and enamour'd body?
  For I do not believe any one possesses a more 
  perfect or enamour'd body than mine; 


  And who thinks the amplest thoughts? For I will 
  surround those thoughts; 


  And who has made hymns fit for the earth? For I 
  am mad with devouring extacy to make joyous 
  hymns for the whole earth!







CALAMUS.


IN PATHS UNTRODDEN.

IN paths untrodden,
In the growth by margins of pond-waters,
Escaped from the life that exhibits itself,

  From all the standards hitherto publish'd&#8212;from the 
  pleasures, profits, conformities,

Which too long I was offering to feed my Soul;

  Clear to me, now, standards not yet publish'd&#8212;clear 
  to me that my Soul,


  That the Soul of the man I speak for, feeds, rejoices 
  in comrades; 

Here, by myself, away from the clank of the world,
Tallying and talk'd to here by tongues aromatic,

  No longer abash'd&#8212;for in this secluded spot I can 
  respond as I would not dare elsewhere,


  Strong upon me the life that does not exhibit itself,
  yet contains all the rest,


  Resolv'd to sing no songs to-day but those of manly 
  attachment,

Projecting them along that substantial life,
Bequeathing, hence, types of athletic love,

  Afternoon, this delicious Ninth-month, in my forty-
  first year,

I proceed, for all who are, or have been, young men,
To tell the secret of my nights and days,
To celebrate the need of comrades.






SCENTED HERBAGE OF MY BREAST.

SCENTED herbage of my breast,

  Leaves from you I yield, I write, to be perused best 
  afterwards,


  Tomb-leaves, growing up above me, above 
  death,


  Perennial roots, tall leaves&#8212;O the winter shall not 
  freeze you, delicate leaves,


  Every year shall you bloom again&#8212;Out from where 
  you retired, you shall emerge again; 


  O I do not know whether many, passing by, will dis-
  cover you, or inhale your faint odor&#8212;but I 
  believe a few will; 


  O slender leaves! O blossoms of my blood! I permit 
  you to tell, in your own way, of the heart that 
  is under you; 


  O burning and throbbing&#8212;surely all will one day be 
  accomplish'd; 


  O I do not know what you mean, there underneath 
  yourselves&#8212;you are not happiness,


  You are often more bitter than I can bear&#8212;you burn 
  and sting me,


  Yet you are very beautiful to me, you faint-tinged 
  roots&#8212;you make me think of Death,


  Death is beautiful from you&#8212;(what indeed is beauti-
  ful, except Death and Love?)


  O I think it is not for life I am chanting here my 
  chant of lovers&#8212;I think it must be for Death,


  For how calm, how solemn it grows, to ascend to the 
  atmosphere of lovers,


  Death or life I am then indifferent&#8212;my Soul declines 
  to prefer,


  I am not sure but the high Soul of lovers welcomes 
  death most; 


  Indeed, O Death, I think now these leaves mean pre-
  cisely the same as you mean; 





  Grow up taller, sweet leaves, that I may see! grow 
  up out of my breast!

Spring away from the conceal'd heart there!

  Do not fold yourself so in your pink-tinged roots,
  timid leaves!


  Do not remain down there so ashamed, herbage of my 
  breast!


  Come, I am determin'd to unbare this broad breast of 
  mine&#8212;I have long enough stifled and choked: 


  Emblematic and capricious blades, I leave you&#8212;now 
  you serve me not; 

Away! I will say what I have to say, by itself,

  I will escape from the sham that was proposed to 
  me,


  I will sound myself and comrades only&#8212;I will never 
  again utter a call, only their call,


  I will raise with it, immortal reverberations through 
  The States,


  I will give an example to lovers, to take permanent 
  shape and will through The States; 


  Through me shall the words be said to make death 
  exhilarating; 


  Give me your tone therefore, O Death, that I may 
  accord with it,


  Give me yourself&#8212;for I see that you belong to me 
  now above all, and are folded inseparably to-
  gether&#8212;you Love and Death are; 


  Nor will I allow you to balk me any more with what I 
  was calling life,


  For now it is convey'd to me that you are the pur-
  ports essential,


  That you hide in these shifting forms of life, for reasons 
  &#8212;and that they are mainly for you,


  That you, beyond them, come forth, to remain, the 
  real reality,


  That behind the mask of materials you patiently wait,
  no matter how long,

That you will one day, perhaps take control of all,




  That you will perhaps dissipate this entire show of 
  appearance,


  That may be you are what it is all for&#8212;but it does not 
  last so very long,

But you will last very long.





Whoever you are, Holding me now in Hand.

WHOEVER you are, holding me now in hand,
Without one thing, all will be useless,

  I give you fair warning, before you attempt me 
  further,

I am not what you supposed, but far different.


Who is he that would become my follower?
Who would sign himself a candidate for my affections?



  The way is suspicious&#8212;the result uncertain, perhaps 
  destructive; 


  You would have to give up all else&#8212;I alone would ex-
  pect to be your God, sole and exclusive,


  Your novitiate would even then be long and exhaust-
  ing,


  The whole past theory of your life, and all conformity 
  to the lives around you, would have to be aban-
  doned; 


  Therefore release me now, before troubling yourself 
  any further&#8212;Let go your hand from my 
  shoulders,

Put me down, and depart on your way.


Or else, by stealth, in some wood, for trial,
Or back of a rock, in the open air,

  (For in any roof'd room of a house I emerge not&#8212;nor 
  in company,





  And in libraries I lie as one dumb, a gawk, or unborn,
  or dead,)


  But just possibly with you on a high hill&#8212;first watch-
  ing lest any person, for miles around, ap-
  proach unawares,


  Or possibly with you sailing at sea, or on the beach of 
  the sea, or some quiet island,

Here to put your lips upon mine I permit you,

  With the comrade's long-dwelling kiss, or the new 
  husband's kiss,

For I am the new husband, and I am the comrade.


Or, if you will, thrusting me beneath your clothing,

  Where I may feel the throbs of your heart, or rest 
  upon your hip,

Carry me when you go forth over land or sea;
For thus, merely touching you, is enough&#8212;is best,

  And thus, touching you, would I silently sleep and be 
  carried eternally.



But these leaves conning, you con at peril,
For these leaves, and me, you will not understand,

  They will elude you at first, and still more afterward 
  &#8212;I will certainly elude you,


  Even while you should think you had unquestionably 
  caught me, behold!

Already you see I have escaped from you.



  For it is not for what I have put into it that I have 
  written this book,

Nor is it by reading it you will acquire it,

  Nor do those know me best who admire me, and 
  vauntingly praise me,


  Nor will the candidates for my love, (unless at most a 
  very few,) prove victorious,


  Nor will my poems do good only&#8212;they will do just as 
  much evil, perhaps more; 


  For all is useless without that which you may guess at 
  many times and not hit&#8212;that which I hinted at; 

Therefore release me, and depart on your way.







THESE I, SINGING IN SPRING.

THESE, I, singing in spring, collect for lovers,

  (For who but I should understand lovers, and all their 
  sorrow and joy?

And who but I should be the poet of comrades?)

  Collecting, I traverse the garden, the world&#8212;but soon 
  I pass the gates,


  Now along the pond-side&#8212;now wading in a little,
  fearing not the wet,


  Now by the post-and-rail fences, where the old stones 
  thrown there, pick'd from the fields, have accu-
  mulated,


  Wild-flowers and vines and weeds come up through 
  the stones, and partly cover them&#8212;Beyond 
  these I pass,

Far, far in the forest, before I think where I go,

  Solitary, smelling the earthy smell, stopping now and 
  then in the silence,


  Alone I had thought&#8212;yet soon a silent troop gathers 
  around me,


  Some walk by my side, and some behind, and some 
  embrace my arms or neck,


  They, the spirits of friends, dead or alive&#8212;thicker 
  they come, a great crowd, and I in the middle,


  Collecting, dispensing, singing in spring, there I wan-
  der with them,


  Plucking something for tokens&#8212;tossing toward who-
  ever is near me; 

Here! lilac, with a branch of pine,

  Here out of my pocket, some moss which I pull'd off 
  a live-oak in Florida, as it hung trailing down,


  Here, some pinks and laurel leaves, and a handful of 
  sage,


  And here what I now draw from the water, wading in 
  the pond-side,


  (O here I last saw him that tenderly loves me&#8212;and 
  returns again, never to separate from me,





  And this, O this shall henceforth be the token of com-
  rades&#8212;this Calamus-root shall,


  Interchange it, youths, with each other! Let none 
  render it back!)


  And twigs of maple, and a bunch of wild orange, and 
  chestnut,


  And stems of currants, and plum-blows, and the aro-
  matic cedar: 

These, I, compass'd around by a thick cloud of spirits,

  Wandering, point to, or touch as I pass, or throw them 
  loosely from me,


  Indicating to each one what he shall have&#8212;giving 
  something to each; 


  But what I drew from the water by the pond-side,
  that I reserve,


  I will give of it&#8212;but only to them that love, as I my-
  self am capable of loving.




A SONG.

1
COME, I will make the continent indissoluble;

  I will make the most splendid race the sun ever yet 
  shone upon; 


  I will make divine magnetic lands,
  With the love of comrades,
  With the life-long love of comrades.



2

  I will plant companionship thick as trees along all the 
  rivers of America, and along the shores of the 
  great lakes, and all over the prairies; 


  I will make inseparable cities, with their arms about 
  each other's necks; 
  By the love of comrades,
  By the manly love of comrades.






3

   For you these, from me, O Democracy, to serve you,
  ma femme!


  For you! for you, I am trilling these songs,
  In the love of comrades,
  In the high-towering love of comrades.





Not Heaving from my Ribb'd Breast only.

NOT heaving from my ribb'd breast only;
Not in sighs at night, in rage, dissatisfied with myself;
Not in those long-drawn, ill-supprest sighs;
Not in many an oath and promise broken;
Not in my wilful and savage soul's volition;
Not in the subtle nourishment of the air;

  Not in this beating and pounding at my temples and 
  wrists; 


  Not in the curious systole and diastole within, which 
  will one day cease; 

Not in many a hungry wish, told to the skies only;

  Not in cries, laughter, defiances, thrown from me when 
  alone, far in the wilds; 

Not in husky pantings through clench'd teeth;

  Not in sounded and resounded words&#8212;chattering 
  words, echoes, dead words; 

Not in the murmurs of my dreams while I sleep,

  Nor the other murmurs of these incredible dreams of 
  every day; 


  Nor in the limbs and senses of my body, that take you 
  and dismiss you continually&#8212;Not there; 


  Not in any or all of them, O adhesiveness! O pulse 
  of my life!


  Need I that you exist and show yourself, any more 
  than in these songs.







Of the Terrible Doubt of Appearances.

OF the terrible doubt of appearances,
Of the uncertainty after all&#8212;that we may be deluded,

  That may-be reliance and hope are but speculations 
  after all,


  That may-be identity beyond the grave is a beautiful 
  fable only,


  May-be the things I perceive&#8212;the animals, plants, men,
  hills, shining and flowing waters,


  The skies of day and night&#8212;colors, densities, forms&#8212; 
  May-be these are, (as doubtless they are,) only 
  apparitions, and the real something has yet to be 
  known; 


  (How often they dart out of themselves, as if to con-
  found me and mock me!


  How often I think neither I know, nor any man knows,
  aught of them;)


  May-be seeming to me what they are, (as doubtless 
  they indeed but seem,) as from my present point 
  of view&#8212;And might prove, (as of course they 
  would,) naught of what they appear, or naught 
  anyhow, from entirely changed points of view; 


  &#8212;To me, these, and the like of these, are curiously 
  answer'd by my lovers, my dear friends; 


  When he whom I love travels with me, or sits a long 
  while holding me by the hand,


  When the subtle air, the impalpable, the sense that 
  words and reason hold not, surround us and 
  pervade us,


  Then I am charged with untold and untellable wisdom 
  &#8212;I am silent&#8212;I require nothing further,


  I cannot answer the question of appearances, or that 
  of identity beyond the grave; 

But I walk or sit indifferent&#8212;I am satisfied,
He ahold of my hand has completely satisfied me.






RECORDERS AGES HENCE.

RECORDERS ages hence!

  Come, I will take you down underneath this impassive 
  exterior&#8212;I will tell you what to say of me; 


  Publish my name and hang up my picture as that of 
  the tenderest lover,


  The friend, the lover's portrait, of whom his friend,
  his lover, was fondest,


  Who was not proud of his songs, but of the measure-
  less ocean of love within him&#8212;and freely 
  pour'd it forth,


  Who often walk'd lonesome walks, thinking of his 
  dear friends, his lovers,


  Who pensive, away from one he lov'd, often lay sleep-
  less and dissatisfied at night,


  Who knew too well the sick, sick dread lest the one 
  he lov'd might secretly be indifferent to him,


  Whose happiest days were far away, through fields,
  in woods, on hills, he and another, wandering 
  hand in hand, they twain, apart from other 
  men,


  Who oft as he saunter'd the streets, curved with his 
  arm the shoulder of his friend&#8212;while the arm 
  of his friend rested upon him also.




When I Heard at the Close of the Day.

  WHEN I heard at the close of the day how my name 
  had been receiv'd with plaudits in the capitol,
  still it was not a happy night for me that fol-
  low'd; 


  And else, when I carous'd, or when my plans were 
  accomplish'd, still I was not happy; 


  But the day when I rose at dawn from the bed of 
  perfect health, refresh'd, singing, inhaling the 
  ripe breath of autumn,





  When I saw the full moon in the west grow pale and 
  disappear in the morning light,


  When I wander'd alone over the beach, and undress-
  ing, bathed, laughing with the cool waters, and 
  saw the sun rise,


  And when I thought how my dear friend, my lover,
  was on his way coming, O then I was happy; 


  O then each breath tasted sweeter&#8212;and all that day 
  my food nourish'd me more&#8212;and the beautiful 
  day pass'd well,


  And the next came with equal joy&#8212;and with the next,
  at evening, came my friend; 


  And that night, while all was still, I heard the waters 
  roll slowly continually up the shores,


  I heard the hissing rustle of the liquid and sands, as 
  directed to me, whispering, to congratulate me,


  For the one I love most lay sleeping by me under the 
  same cover in the cool night,


  In the stillness, in the autumn moonbeams, his face 
  was inclined toward me,


  And his arm lay lightly around my breast&#8212;and that 
  night I was happy.




Are you the New Person Drawn Toward me?

ARE you the new person drawn toward me?

  To begin with, take warning&#8212;I am surely far differ-
  ent from what you suppose; 

Do you suppose you will find in me your ideal?

  Do you think it so easy to have me become your 
  lover?


  Do you think the friendship of me would be unalloy'd 
  satisfaction?

Do you think I am trusty and faithful?




  Do you see no further than this fa&#231;ade&#8212;this smooth 
  and tolerant manner of me?


  Do you suppose yourself advancing on real ground 
  toward a real heroic man?


  Have you no thought, O dreamer, that it may be all 
  maya, illusion?




Roots and Leaves Themselves Alone.

ROOTS and leaves themselves alone are these;

  Scents brought to men and women from the wild 
  woods, and from the pond-side,


  Breast-sorrel and pinks of love&#8212;fingers that wind 
  around tighter than vines,


  Gushes from the throats of birds, hid in the foliage 
  of trees, as the sun is risen; 


  Breezes of land and love&#8212;breezes set from living 
  shores out to you on the living sea&#8212;to you,
  O sailors!


  Frost-mellow'd berries, and Third-month twigs,
  offer'd fresh to young persons wandering out 
  in the fields when the winter breaks up,


  Love-buds, put before you and within you, whoever 
  you are,

Buds to be unfolded on the old terms;

  If you bring the warmth of the sun to them, they 
  will open, and bring form, color, perfume, to 
  you; 


  If you become the aliment and the wet, they will 
  become flowers, fruits, tall branches and trees.







Not Heat Flames up and Consumes.

NOT heat flames up and consumes,
Not sea-waves hurry in and out,

  Not the air, delicious and dry, the air of the ripe 
  summer, bears lightly along white down-balls 
  of myriads of seeds,

Wafted, sailing gracefully, to drop where they may;

  Not these&#8212;O none of these, more than the flames of 
  me, consuming, burning for his love whom I 
  love!

O none, more than I, hurrying in and out;

  Does the tide hurry, seeking something, and never 
  give up? O I the same; 


  O nor down-balls, nor perfumes, nor the high, rain-
  emitting clouds, are borne through the open 
  air,


  Any more than my Soul is borne through the open 
  air,


  Wafted in all directions, O love, for friendship, for 
  you.




TRICKLE, DROPS.

TRICKLE, drops! my blue veins leaving!
O drops of me! trickle, slow drops,
Candid, from me falling&#8212;drip, bleeding drops,

  From wounds made to free you whence you were 
  prison'd,

From my face&#8212;from my forehead and lips,

  From my breast&#8212;from within where I was conceal'd 
  &#8212;press forth, red drops&#8212;confession drops; 


  Stain every page&#8212;stain every song I sing, every word 
  I say, bloody drops; 




Let them know your scarlet heat&#8212;let them glisten;
Saturate them with yourself, all ashamed and wet;

  Glow upon all I have written or shall write, bleeding 
  drops; 

Let it all be seen in your light, blushing drops.



Of Him I Love Day and Night.

  OF him I love day and night, I dream'd I heard he was 
  dead; 


  And I dream'd I went where they had buried him I love 
  &#8212;but he was not in that place; 


  And I dream'd I wander'd, searching among burial-
  places, to find him; 

And I found that every place was a burial-place;

  The houses full of life were equally full of death, (this 
  house is now;)


  The streets, the shipping, the places of amusement,
  the Chicago, Boston, Philadelphia, the Manna-
  hatta, were as full of the dead as of the living,


  And fuller, O vastly fuller, of the dead than of the 
  living; 


  &#8212;And what I dream'd I will henceforth tell to every 
  person and age,

And I stand henceforth bound to what I dream'd;

  And now I am willing to disregard burial-places, and 
  dispense with them; 


  And if the memorials of the dead were put up indif-
  ferently everywhere, even in the room where I 
  eat or sleep, I should be satisfied; 


  And if the corpse of any one I love, or if my own 
  corpse, be duly render'd to powder, and pour'd 
  in the sea, I shall be satisfied; 


  Or if it be distributed to the winds, I shall be sat-
  isfied.







CITY OF ORGIES.

CITY of orgies, walks and joys!

  City whom that I have lived and sung in your midst 
  will one day make you illustrious,


  Not the pageants of you&#8212;not your shifting tableaux,
  your spectacles, repay me; 


  Not the interminable rows of your houses&#8212;nor the 
  ships at the wharves,


  Nor the processions in the streets, nor the bright win-
  dows, with goods in them; 


  Nor to converse with learn'd persons, or bear my share 
  in the soiree or feast; 


  Not those&#8212;but, as I pass, O Manhattan! your fre-
  quent and swift flash of eyes offering me love,

Offering response to my own&#8212;these repay me;
Lovers, continual lovers, only repay me.



BEHOLD THIS SWARTHY FACE.

  BEHOLD this swarthy face, this unrefined face&#8212;these 
  gray eyes,

This beard&#8212;the white wool, unclipt upon my neck,

  My brown hands, and the silent manner of me, with-
  out charm; 


  Yet comes one, a Manhattanese, and ever at parting,
  kisses me lightly on the lips with robust love,


  And I, in the public room, or on the crossing of the 
  street, or on the ship's deck, kiss him in return; 


  We observe that salute of American comrades, land 
  and sea,

We are those two natural and nonchalant persons.






I saw in Louisiana a Live-Oak Growing.

I SAW in Louisiana a live-oak growing,

  All alone stood it, and the moss hung down from the 
  branches; 


  Without any companion it grew there, uttering joyous 
  leaves of dark green,


  And its look, rude, unbending, lusty, made me think 
  of myself; 


  But I wonder'd how it could utter joyous leaves,
  standing alone there, without its friend, its 
  lover near&#8212;for I knew I could not; 


  And I broke off a twig with a certain number of 
  leaves upon it, and twined around it a little 
  moss,


  And brought it away&#8212;and I have placed it in sight in 
  my room; 


  It is not needed to remind me as of my own dear 
  friends,


  (For I believe lately I think of little else than of 
  them;)


  Yet it remains to me a curious token&#8212;it makes me 
  think of manly love; 


  &#8212;For all that, and though the live-oak glistens there 
  in Louisiana, solitary, in a wide flat space,


  Uttering joyous leaves all its life, without a friend, a 
  lover, near,

I know very well I could not.



That Music Always Round Me.

  THAT music always round me, unceasing, unbeginning 
  &#8212;yet long untaught I did not hear; 

But now the chorus I hear, and am elated;

  A tenor, strong, ascending, with power and health,
  with glad notes of day-break I hear,





  A soprano, at intervals, sailing buoyantly over the 
  tops of immense waves,


  A transparent base, shuddering lusciously under and 
  through the universe,


  The triumphant tutti&#8212;the funeral wailings, with 
  sweet flutes and violins&#8212;all these I fill myself 
  with; 


  I hear not the volumes of sound merely&#8212;I am moved 
  by the exquisite meanings,


  I listen to the different voices winding in and out,
  striving, contending with fiery vehemence to 
  excel each other in emotion,


  I do not think the peformers know themselves&#8212;but 
  now I think I begin to know them.




TO A STRANGER.

  PASSING stranger! you do not know how longingly I 
  look upon you,


  You must be he I was seeking, or she I was seeking,
  (it comes to me, as of a dream,)

I have somewhere surely lived a life of joy with you,

  All is recall'd as we flit by each other, fluid, affection-
  ate, chaste, matured,


  You grew up with me, were a boy with me, or a girl 
  with me,


  I ate with you, and slept with you&#8212;your body has 
  become not yours only, nor left my body mine 
  only,


  You give me the pleasure of your eyes, face, flesh, as 
  we pass&#8212;you take of my beard, breast, hands,
  in return,


  I am not to speak to you&#8212;I am to think of you when 
  I sit alone, or wake at night alone,

I am to wait&#8212;I do not doubt I am to meet you again,
I am to see to it that I do not lose you.






This Moment, Yearning and Thoughtful.
THIS moment yearning and thoughtful, sitting alone,

  It seems to me there are other men in other lands,
  yearning and thoughtful; 


  It seems to me I can look over and behold them, in 
  Prussia, Italy, France, Spain&#8212;or far, far away,
  in China, or in Russia or India&#8212;talking other 
  dialects; 


  And it seems to me if I could know those men, I 
  should become attached to them, as I do to men 
  in my own lands; 

O I know we should be brethren and lovers,
I know I should be happy with them.



I Hear it was Charged Against Me.

  I HEAR it was charged against me that I sought to 
  destroy institutions; 

But really I am neither for nor against institutions;

  (What indeed have I in common with them?&#8212;Or 
  what with the destruction of them?)


  Only I will establish in the Mannahatta, and in every 
  city of These States, inland and seaboard,


  And in the fields and woods, and above every keel 
  little or large, that dents the water,


  Without edifices, or rules, or trustees, or any argu-
  ment,

The institution of the dear love of comrades.






The Prairie-Grass Dividing.

THE prairie-grass dividing&#8212;its special odor breathing,
I demand of it the spiritual corresponding,

  Demand the most copious and close companionship 
  of men,

Demand the blades to rise of words, acts, beings,

  Those of the open atmosphere, coarse, sunlit, fresh,
  nutritious,


  Those that go their own gait, erect, stepping with 
  freedom and command&#8212;leading, not following,


  Those with a never-quell'd audacity&#8212;those with sweet 
  and lusty flesh, clear of taint,


  Those that look carelessly in the faces of Presidents 
  and Governors, as to say, Who are you? 


  Those of earth-born passion, simple, never constrain'd' 
  never obedient,

Those of inland America.



We Two Boys Together Clinging.

WE two boys together clinging,
One the other never leaving,

  Up and down the roads going&#8212;North and South 
  excursions making,


  Power enjoying&#8212;elbows stretching&#8212;fingers clutch-
  ing,


  Armed and fearless&#8212;eating, drinking, sleeping, lov-
  ing,


  No law less than ourselves owning&#8212;sailing, soldiering,
  thieving, threatening,


  Misers, menials, priests alarming&#8212;air breathing, water 
  drinking, on the turf of the sea-beach dancing,


  Cities wrenching, ease scorning, statutes mocking,
  feebleness chasing,

Fulfilling our foray.






O Living Always&#8212;Always Dying!

O LIVING always&#8212;always dying!
O the burials of me, past and present!

  O me, while I stride ahead, material, visible, imperi-
  ous as ever!


  O me, what I was for years, now dead, (I lament not 
  &#8212;I am content;)


  O to disengage myself from those corpses of me,
  which I turn and look at, where I cast them!


  To pass on, (O living! always living!) and leave the 
  corpses behind!




When I Peruse the Conquer'd Fame.

  WHEN I peruse the conquer'd fame of heroes, and the 
  victories of mighty generals, I do not envy the 
  generals,


  Nor the President in his Presidency, nor the rich in 
  his great house; 


  But when I read of the brotherhood of lovers, how it 
  was with them,


  How through life, through dangers, odium, unchang-
  ing, long and long,


  Through youth, and through middle and old age, how 
  unfaltering, how affectionate and faithful they 
  were,


  Then I am pensive&#8212;I hastily put down the book, and 
  walk away, fill'd with the bitterest envy.




A GLIMPSE.

A GLIMPSE, through an interstice caught,

  Of a crowd of workmen and drivers in a bar-room,
  around the stove, late of a winter night&#8212;And I 
  unremark'd, seated in a corner; 





  Of a youth who loves me, and whom I love, silently 
  approaching, and seating himself near, that he 
  may hold me by the hand; 


  A long while, amid the noises of coming and going&#8212; 
  of drinking and oath and smutty jest,


  There we two, content, happy in being together,
  speaking little, perhaps not a word.




A PROMISE TO CALIFORNIA.

A PROMISE to California,
Also to the great Pastoral Plains, and for Oregon:

  Sojourning east a while longer, soon I travel toward 
  you, to remain, to teach robust American love; 


  For I know very well that I and robust love belong 
  among you, inland, and along the Western 
  Sea; 


  For These States tend inland, and toward the Western 
  Sea&#8212;and I will also.




HERE, SAILOR!

  WHAT ship, puzzled at sea, cons for the true reckon-
  ing?


  Or, coming in, to avoid the bars, and follow the chan-
  nel, a perfect pilot needs?


  Here, sailor! Here, ship! take aboard the most perfect 
  pilot,


  Whom, in a little boat, putting off, and rowing, I,
  hailing you, offer.







HERE THE FRAILEST LEAVES OF ME.

  HERE the frailest leaves of me, and yet my strongest-
  lasting: 


  Here I shade down and hide my thoughts&#8212;I do not 
  expose them,


  And yet they expose me more than all my other 
  poems.




WHAT THINK YOU I TAKE MY PEN IN HAND?

WHAT think you I take my pen in hand to record?

  The battle-ship, perfect-model'd, majestic, that I saw 
  pass the offing to-day under full sail?


  The splendors of the past day? Or the splendor of the 
  night that envelops me?


  Or the vaunted glory and growth of the great city 
  spread around me?&#8212;No; 


  But I record of two simple men I saw to-day, on the 
  pier, in the midst of the crowd, parting the part-
  ing of dear friends; 


  The one to remain hung on the other's neck, and pas-
  sionately kiss'd him,


  While the one to depart, tightly prest the one to 
  remain in his arms.




NO LABOR-SAVING MACHINE.
 No labor-saving machine,
Nor discovery have I made;

  Nor will I be able to leave behind me any wealthy 
  bequest to found a hospital or library,

Nor reminiscence of any deed of courage, for America,

  Nor literary success, nor intellect&#8212;nor book for the 
  book-shelf; 

Only a few carols, vibrating through the air, I leave,
For comrades and lovers.






I DREAMED IN A DREAM.

  I DREAM'D in a dream, I saw a city invincible to the 
  attacks of the whole of the rest of the earth; 

I dream'd that was the new City of Friends;

  Nothing was greater there than the quality of robust 
  love&#8212;it led the rest; 


  It was seen every hour in the actions of the men of 
  that city,

And in all their looks and words.



To THE EAST AND TO THE WEST.
 To the East and to the West;
To the man of the Seaside State, and of Pennsylvania,

  To the Kanadian of the North&#8212;to the Southerner I 
  love; 


  These, with perfect trust, to depict you as myself&#8212;the 
  germs are in all men; 


  I believe the main purport of These States is to found 
  a superb friendship, exalt&#233;, previously unknown,


  Because I perceive it waits, and has been always wait-
  ing, latent in all men.




EARTH! MY LIKENESS!

EARTH! my likeness!

  Though you look so impassive, ample and spheric 
  there,

I now suspect that is not all;

  I now suspect there is something fierce in you, eligible 
  to burst forth; 

For an athlete is enamour'd of me&#8212;and I of him,

  But toward him there is something fierce and terrible 
  in me, eligible to burst forth,

I dare not tell it in words&#8212;not even in these songs.






A LEAF FOR HAND IN HAND.

A LEAF for hand in hand!
You natural persons old and young!

  You on the Mississippi, and on all the branches and 
  bayous of the Mississippi!

You friendly boatmen and mechanics! You roughs!

  You twain! And all processions moving along the 
  streets!


  I wish to infuse myself among you till I see it com-
  mon for you to walk hand in hand!




FAST ANCHOR'D, ETERNAL, O LOVE.

FAST-ANCHOR'D, eternal, O love! O woman I love;

  O bride! O wife! more resistless than I can tell, the 
  thought of you!

Then separate, as disembodied, or another born,
Ethereal, the last athletic reality, my consolation;
I ascend&#8212;I float in the regions of your love, O man,
O sharer of my roving life.



SOMETIMES WITH ONE I LOVE.

  SOMETIMES with one I love, I fill myself with rage, for 
  fear I effuse unreturn'd love; 


  But now I think there is no unreturn'd love&#8212;the pay 
  is certain, one way or another; 


  (I loved a certain person ardently, and my love was 
  not return'd; 

Yet out of that, I have written these songs.)






THAT SHADOW, MY LIKENESS.

  THAT shadow, my likeness, that goes to and fro, seek-
  ing a livelihood, chattering, chaffering; 


  How often I find myself standing and looking at it 
  where it flits; 


  How often I question and doubt whether that is really 
  me; 


  But in these, and among my lovers, and carolling my 
  songs,

O I never doubt whether that is really me.





AMONG THE MULTITUDE.

AMONG the men and women, the multitude,

  I perceive one picking me out by secret and divine 
  signs,


  Acknowledging none else&#8212;not parent, wife, husband,
  brother, child, any nearer than I am; 


  Some are baffled&#8212;But that one is not&#8212;that one knows 
  me.



Ah, lover and perfect equal!

  I meant that you should discover me so, by my faint 
  indirections; 


  And I, when I meet you, mean to discover you by the 
  like in you.





TO A WESTERN BOY.

O BOY of the West!

  To you many things to absorb, I teach, to help you 
  become eleve of mine: 

Yet if blood like mine circle not in your veins;

  If you be not silently selected by lovers, and do not 
  silently select lovers,


  Of what use is it that you seek to become eleve of 
  mine?







O YOU WHOM I OFTEN AND SILENTLY COME.

  O YOU whom I often and silently come where you are,
  that I may be with you; 


  As I walk by your side, or sit near, or remain in the 
  same room with you,


  Little you know the subtle electric fire that for your 
  sake is playing within me.






FULL OF LIFE, NOW.

FULL of life, now, compact, visible,
I, forty years old the Eighty-third Year of The States,

  To one a century hence, or any number of centuries 
  hence,

To you, yet unborn, these seeking you.



  When you read these, I, that was visible, am become 
  invisible; 


  Now it is you, compact, visible, realizing my poems,
  seeking me; 


  Fancying how happy you were, if I could be with you,
  and become your loving comrade; 


  Be it as if I were with you. Be not too certain but I 
  am now with you.









SALUT AU MONDE!

1

O TAKE my hand, Walt Whitman!
Such gliding wonders! such sights and sounds!
Such join'd unended links, each hook'd to the next!
Each answering all&#8212;each sharing the earth with all.


What widens within you, Walt Whitman?
What waves and soils exuding?
What climes? what persons and lands are here?
Who are the infants? some playing, some slumbering?
Who are the girls? who are the married women?

  Who are the three old men going slowly with their 
  arms about each others' necks?


  What rivers are these? what forests and fruits are 
  these?


  What are the mountains call'd that rise so high in the 
  mists?


  What myriads of dwellings are they, fill'd with 
  dewellers?




2

Within me latitude widens, longitude lengthens;

  Asia, Africa, Europe, are to the east&#8212;America is pro-
  vided for in the west; 

Banding the bulge of the earth winds the hot equator,
Curiously north and south turn the axis-ends;

  Within me is the longest day&#8212;the sun wheels in slant-
  ing rings&#8212;it does not set for months?





  Stretch'd in due time within me the midnight sun just 
  rises above the horizon, and sinks again; 


  Within me zones, seas, cataracts, plants, volcanoes,
  groups,


  Malaysia, Polynesia, and the great West Indian 
  islands.




3

What do you hear, Walt Whitman?



  I hear the workman singing, and the farmer's wife 
  singing; 


  I hear in the distance the sounds of children, and of 
  animals early in the day; 


  I hear quick rifle-cracks from the riflemen of East 
  Tennessee and Kentucky, hunting on hills; 


  I hear emulous shouts of Australians, pursuing the 
  wild horse; 


  I hear the Spanish dance, with castanets, in the chest-
  nut shade, to the rebeck and guitar; 

I hear continual echoes from the Thames;
I hear fierce French liberty songs;

  I hear of the Italian boat-sculler the musical recita-
  tive of old poems; 


  I hear the Virginia plantation chorus of negroes, of a 
  harvest night, in the glare of pine knots; 


  I hear the strong baritone of the 'long-shore-men of 
  Mannahatta; 


  I hear the stevedores unlading the cargoes, and sing-
  ing; 


  I hear the screams of the water-fowl of solitary north-
  west lakes; 


  I hear the rustling pattering of locusts, as they strike 
  the grain and grass with the showers of their 
  terrible clouds; 


  I hear the Coptic refrain, toward sundown, pensively 
  falling on the breast of the black venerable vast 
  mother, the Nile; 





  I hear the bugles of raft-tenders on the streams of 
  Kanada; 


  I hear the chirp of the Mexican muleteer, and the 
  bells of the mule; 


  I hear the Arab muezzin, calling from the top of the 
  mosque; 


  I hear the Christian priests at the altars of their 
  churches&#8212;I hear the responsive base and 
  soprano; 


  I hear the wail of utter despair of the white-hair'd 
  Irish grand-parents, when they learn the death 
  of their grandson; 


  I hear the cry of the Cossack, and the sailor's voice,
  putting to sea at Okotsk; 


  I hear the wheeze of the slave-coffle, as the slaves 
  march on&#8212;as the husky gangs pass on by twos 
  and threes, fasten'd together with wrist-chains 
  and ankle-chains; 


  I hear the entreaties of women tied up for punishment 
  &#8212;I hear the sibilant whisk of thongs through 
  the air; 

I hear the Hebrew reading his records and psalms;

  I hear the rhythmic myths of the Greeks, and the 
  strong legends of the Romans; 


  I hear the tale of the divine life and bloody death of 
  the beautiful God, the Christ; 


  I hear the Hindoo teaching his favorite pupil the 
  loves, wars, adages, transmitted safely to this 
  day from poets who wrote three thousand years 
  ago.




4

What do you see, Walt Whitman?

  Who are they you salute, and that one after another 
  salute you?



I see a great round wonder rolling through the air;

  I see diminute farms, hamlets, ruins, grave-yards,
  jails, factories, palaces, hovels, huts of barba-
  rians, tents of nomads, upon the surface; 





  I see the shaded part on one side, where the sleepers 
  are sleeping&#8212;and the sun-lit part on the other 
  side,

I see the curious silent change of the light and shade,

  I see distant lands, as real and near to the inhabitants 
  of them, as my land is to me,



I see plenteous waters;

  I see mountain peaks&#8212;I see the sierras of Andes and 
  Alleghanies, where they range; 


  I see plainly the Himalayas, Chian Shahs, Altays,
  Ghauts; 

I see the Rocky Mountains, and the Peak of Winds;
I see the Styrian Alps, and the Karnac Alps;

  I see the Pyrenees, Balks, Carpathians&#8212;and to the 
  north the Dofrafields, and off at sea Mount 
  Hecla; 

I see Vesuvius and Etna&#8212;I see the Anahuacs;

  I see the Mountains of the Moon, and the Snow 
  Mountains, and the Red Mountains of Mada-
  gascar; 


  I see the Vermont hills, and the long string of Cor-
  dilleras; 

I see the vast deserts of Western America;
I see the Lybian, Arabian, and Asiatic deserts;
I see huge dreadful Arctic and Antartic icebergs;

  I see the superior oceans and the inferior ones&#8212;the 
  Atlantic and Pacific, the sea of Mexico, the 
  Brazilian sea, and the sea of Peru,


  The Japan waters, those of Hindostan, the China Sea,
  and the Gulf of Guinea,


  The spread of the Baltic, Caspian, Bothnia, the British 
  shores, and the Bay of Biscay,


  The clear-sunn'd Mediterranean, and from one to an-
  other of its islands,

The inland fresh-tasted seas of North America,
The White Sea, and the sea around Greenland.





I behold the mariners of the world;

  Some are in storms&#8212;some in the night, with the 
  watch on the lookout; 


  Some drifting helplessly&#8212;some with contagious dis-
  eases.




  I behold the sail and steamships of the world, some 
  in clusters in port, some on their voyages; 


  Some double the Cape of Storms&#8212;some Cape Verde,
  &#8212;others Cape Guardafui, Bon, or Bajadore; 


  Others Dondra Head&#8212;others pass the Straits of Sun-
  da&#8212;others Cape Lopatka&#8212;others Behring's 
  Straits; 


  Others Cape Horn&#8212;others the Gulf of Mexico, or 
  along Cuba or Hayti&#8212;others Hudson's Bay or 
  Baffin's Bay; 


  Others pass the Straits of Dover&#8212;others enter the 
  Wash&#8212;others the Firth of Solway&#8212;others 
  round Cape Clear&#8212;others the Land's End; 

Others traverse the Zuyder Zee, or the Scheld;
Others add to the exits and entrances at Sandy Hook;

  Others to the comers and goers at Gibraltar, or the 
  Dardanelles; 


  Others sternly push their way through the northern 
  winter-packs; 

Others descend or ascend the Obi or the Lena:

  Others the Niger or the Congo&#8212;others the Indus, the 
  Burampooter and Cambodia; 


  Others wait at the wharves of Manhattan, steam'd up,
  ready to start; 

Wait, swift and swarthy, in the ports of Australia;

  Wait at Liverpool, Glasgow, Dublin, Marseilles, Lis-
  bon, Naples, Hamburg, Bremen, Bordeaux, the 
  Hague, Copenhagen; 

Wait at Valparaiso, Rio Janeiro, Panama;

  Wait at their moorings at Boston, Philadelphia, Balti-
  more, Charleston, New Orleans, Galveston, San 
  Francisco.







5

I see the tracks of the rail-roads of the earth;

  I see them welding State to State, city to city, through 
  North America; 

I see them in Great Britain, I see them in Europe;
I see them in Asia and in Africa.


I see the electric telegraphs of the earth;

  I see the filaments of the news of the wars, deaths,
  losses, gains, passions, of my race.



I see the long river-stripes of the earth;

  I see where the Mississippi flows&#8212;I see where the 
  Columbia flows; 

I see the Great River, and the Falls of Niagara;
I see the Amazon and the Paraguay;

  I see the four great rivers of China, the Amour, the 
  Yellow River, the Yiang-tse, and the Pearl; 


  I see where the Seine flows, and where the Loire, the 
  Rhone, and the Guadalquiver flow; 


  I see the windings of the Volga, the Dnieper, the 
  Oder; 


  I see the Tuscan going down the Arno, and the Vene-
  tian along the Po; 

I see the Greek seaman sailing out of Egina bay.



6


  I see the site of the old empire of Assyria, and that 
  of Persia, and that of India; 


  I see the falling of the Ganges over the high rim of 
  Saukara.




  I see the place of the idea of the Deity incarnated 
  by avatars in human forms; 


  I see the spots of the successions of priests on the earth 
  &#8212;oracles, sacrificers, brahmins, sabians, lamas,
  monks, muftis, exhorters; 





  I see where druids walked the groves of Mona&#8212;I see 
  the mistletoe and vervain; 


  I see the temples of the deaths of the bodies of Gods 
  &#8212;I see the old signifiers.




  I see Christ once more eating the bread of his last 
  supper, in the midst of youths and old persons; 


  I see where the strong divine young man, the Hercu-
  les, toil'd faithfully and long, and then died; 


  I see the place of the innocent rich life and hapless 
  fate of the beautiful nocturnal son, the full-
  limb'd Bacchus; 


  I see Kneph, blooming, drest in blue, with the crown 
  of feathers on his head; 


  I see Hermes, unsuspected, dying, well-beloved, saying 
  to the people, Do not weep for me, 


  This is not my true country, I have lived banish'd from 
  my true country&#8212;I now go back there, 


  I return to the celestial sphere, where every one goes in 
  his turn.




7


  I see the battle-fields of the earth&#8212;grass grows up-
  on them, and blossoms and corn; 

I see the tracks of ancient and modern expeditions.



  I see the nameless masonries, venerable messages of 
  the unknown events, heroes, records of the earth.



I see the places of the sagas;
I see pine-trees and fir-trees torn by northern blasts;

  I see granite boulders and cliffs&#8212;I see green meadows 
  and lakes; 

I see the burial-cairns of Scandinavian warriors;

  I see them raised high with stones, by the marge of 
  restless oceans, that the dead men's spirits,
  when they wearied of their quiet graves, might 
  rise up through the mounds, and gaze on the 
  tossing billows, and be refresh'd by storms, im-
  mensity, liberty, action.






I see the steppes of Asia;

  I see the tumuli of Mongolia&#8212;I see the tents of Kal-
  mucks and Baskirs; 

I see the nomadic tribes, with herds of oxen and cows;

  I see the table-lands notch'd with ravines&#8212;I see the 
  jungles and deserts; 


  I see the camel, the wild steed, the bustard, the fat-
  tail'd sheep, the antelope, and the burrowing 
  wolf.



I see the high-lands of Abyssinia;

  I see flocks of goats feeding, and see the fig-tree,
  tamarind, date,


  And see fields of teff-wheat, and see the places of 
  verdure and gold.



I see the Brazilian vaquero;
I see the Bolivian ascending Mount Sorata;

  I see the Wacho crossing the plains&#8212;I see the incom-
  parable rider of horses with his lasso on his 
  arm; 


  I see over the pampas the pursuit of wild cattle for 
  their hides.




8


  I see little and large sea-dots, some inhabited, some 
  uninhabited; 


  I see two boats with nets, lying off the shore of Pau-
  manok, quite still; 


  I see ten fishermen waiting&#8212;they discover now a 
  thick school of mossbonkers&#8212;they drop the 
  join'd sein-ends in the water,


  The boats separate&#8212;they diverge and row off, each on 
  its rounding course to the beach, enclosing the 
  mossbonkers; 


  The net is drawn in by a windlass by those who stop 
  ashore,


  Some of the fishermen lounge in their boats&#8212;others 
  stand negligently ankle-deep in the water,
  poised on strong legs; 





  The boats are partly drawn up&#8212;the water slaps 
  against them; 


  On the sand, in heaps and winrows, well out from the 
  water, lie the green-back'd spotted mossbonkers.




9


  I see the despondent red man in the west, lingering 
  about the banks of Moingo, and about Lake 
  Pepin; 


  He has heard the quail and beheld the honey-bee, and 
  sadly prepared to depart.



I see the regions of snow and ice;
I see the sharp-eyed Samoiede and the Finn;
I see the seal-seeker in his boat, poising his lance;

  I see the Siberian on his slight-built sledge, drawn by 
  dogs; 


  I see the porpoise-hunters&#8212;I see the whale-crews of 
  the South Pacific and the North Atlantic; 


  I see the cliffs, glaciers, torrents, valleys, of Switzer-
  land&#8212;I mark the long winters, and the iso-
  lation.




  I see the cities of the earth, and make myself at 
  random a part of them; 

I am a real Parisian;

  I am a habitan of Vienna, St. Petersburg, Berlin, Con-
  stantinople; 

I am of Adelaide, Sidney, Melbourne;

  I am of London, Manchester, Bristol, Edinburgh,
  Limerick; 


  I am of Madrid, Cadiz, Barcelona, Oporto, Lyons,
  Brussels, Berne, Frankfort, Stuttgart, Turin,
  Florence; 


  I belong in Moscow, Cracow, Warsaw&#8212;or northward 
  in Christiania or Stockholm&#8212;or in Siberian 
  Irkutsk&#8212;or in some street in Iceland; 


  I descend upon all those cities, and rise from them 
  again.







10

I see vapors exhaling from unexplored countries;

  I see the savage types, the bow and arrow, the pois-
  on'd splint, the fetish, and the obi.



I see African and Asiatic towns;

  I see Algiers, Tripoli, Derne, Mogadore, Timbuctoo,
  Monrovia; 


  I see the swarms of Pekin, Canton, Benares, Delhi,
  Calcutta, Yedo; 


  I see the Kruman in his hut, and the Dahoman and 
  Ashantee-man in their huts; 

I see the Turk smoking opium in Aleppo;

  I see the picturesque crowds at the fairs of Khiva, and 
  those of Herat; 


  I see Teheran&#8212;I see Muscat and Medina, and the 
  intervening sands&#8212;I see the caravans toiling 
  onward; 


  I see Egypt and the Egyptians&#8212;I see the pyramids 
  and obelisks; 


  I look on chisel'd histories, songs, philosophies, cut 
  in slabs of sand-stone, or on granite blocks; 


  I see at Memphis mummy-pits, containing mummies.
  embalm'd, swathed in linen cloth, lying there 
  many centuries; 


  I look on the fall'n Theban, the large-ball'd eyes, the 
  side-drooping neck, the hands folded across the 
  breast.



I see the menials of the earth, laboring;
I see the prisoners in the prisons;
I see the defective human bodies of the earth;

  I see the blind, the deaf and dumb, idiots, hunch-
  backs, lunatics; 


  I see the pirates, thieves, betrayers, murderers, slave-
  makers of the earth; 


  I see the helpless infants, and the helpless old men 
  and women.






I see male and female everywhere;
I see the serene brotherhood of philosophs;
I see the constructiveness of my race;

  I see the results of the perseverance and industry of 
  my race; 


  I see ranks, colors, barbarisms, civilizations&#8212;I go 
  among them&#8212;I mix indiscriminately,

And I salute all the inhabitants of the earth.



11

You, where you are!
You daughter or son of England!

  You of the mighty Slavic tribes and empires! you 
  Russ in Russia!


  You dim-descended, black, divine-soul'd African, large,
  fine-headed, nobly-form'd, superbly destin'd, on 
  equal terms with me!


  You Norwegian! Swede! Dane! Icelander! you 
  Prussian!

You Spaniard of Spain! you Portuguese!
You Frenchwoman and Frenchman of France!
You Belge! you liberty-lover of the Netherlands!

  You sturdy Austrian! you Lombard! Hun! Bohe-
  mian! farmer of Styria!

You neighbor of the Danube!

  You working-man of the Rhine, the Elbe, or the 
  Weser! you working-woman too!


  You Sardinian! you Bavarian! Swabian! Saxon!
  Wallachian! Bulgarian!

You citizen of Prague! Roman! Neapolitan! Greek!
You lithe matador in the arena at Seville!

  You mountaineer living lawlessly on the Taurus or 
  Caucasus!


  You Bokh horse-herd, watching your mares and stal-
  lions feeding!


  You beautiful-bodied Persian, at full speed in the sad-
  dle, shooting arrows to the mark!


  You Chinaman and Chinawoman of China! you Tar-
  tar of Tartary!




You women of the earth subordinated at your tasks!

  You Jew journeying in your old age through every 
  risk, to stand once on Syrian ground!

You other Jews waiting in all lands for your Messiah!

  You thoughtful Armenian, pondering by some stream 
  of the Euphrates! you peering amid the ruins 
  of Nineveh! you ascending Mount Ararat!


  You foot-worn pilgrim welcoming the far-away sparkle 
  of the minarets of Mecca!


  You sheiks along the stretch from Suez to Babelman-
  deb, ruling your families and tribes!


  You olive-grower tending your fruit on fields of Naz-
  areth, Damascus, or Lake Tiberias!


  You Thibet trader on the wide inland, or bargaining 
  in the shops of Lassa!


  You Japanese man or woman! you liver in Madagas-
  car, Ceylon, Sumatra, Borneo!


  All you continentals of Asia, Africa, Europe, Austra-
  lia, indifferent of place!


  All you on the numberless islands of the archipela-
  goes of the sea!

And you of centuries hence, when you listen to me!

  And you, each and everywhere, whom I specify not,
  but include just the same!


  Health to you! Good will to you all&#8212;from me and 
  America sent.



Each of us inevitable;

  Each of us limitless&#8212;each of us with his or her right 
  upon the earth; 

Each of us allow'd the eternal purports of the earth;
Each of us here as divinely as any is here.



12


  You Hottentot with clicking palate! You wolly-
  hair'd hordes!


  You own'd persons, dropping sweat-drops or blood-
  drops!





  You human forms with the fathomless ever-impressive 
  countenances of brutes!


  I dare not refuse you&#8212;the scope of the world, and of 
  time and space, are upon me.
         
 


  You poor koboo whom the meanest of the rest look 
  down upon, for all your glimmering language 
  and spirituality!


  You low expiring aborigines of the hills of Utah,
  Oregon, California!

You dwarf'd Kamtschatkan, Greenlander, Lapp!

  You Austral negro, naked, red, sooty, with protrusive 
  lip, grovelling, seeking your food!

You Caffre, Berber, Soudanese!
You haggard, uncouth, untutor'd Bedowee!
You plague-swarms in Madras, Nankin, Kaubul, Cairo!
You bather bathing in the Ganges!

  You benighted roamer of Amazonia! you Patagonian!
  you Fejee-man!


  You peon of Mexico! you slave of Carolina, Texas,
  Tennessee!

I do not prefer others so very much before you either;

  I do not say one word against you, away back there,
  where you stand; 

(You will come forward in due time to my side.)



  My spirit has pass'd in compassion and determina-
  tion around the whole earth; 


  I have look'd for equals and lovers, and found them 
  ready for me in all lands; 


  I think some divine rapport has equalized me with 
  them.




13


  O vapors! I think I have risen with you, and moved 
  away to distant continents, and fallen down there,
  for reasons; 

I think I have blown with you, O winds;
O waters, I have finger'd every shore with you.






  I have run through what any river or strait of the 
  globe has run through; 


  I have taken my stand on the bases of peninsulas, and 
  on the highest embedded rocks, to cry thence.



Salut au Monde!

  What cities the light or warmth penetrates, I pen-
  etrate those cities myself; 


  All islands to which birds wing their way, I wing my 
  way myself.



Toward all,

  I raise high the perpendicular hand&#8212;I make the 
  signal,

To remain after me in sight forever,
For all the haunts and homes of men.





WHAT PLACE IS BESIEGED?

  WHAT place is besieged, and vainly tries to raise the 
  siege?


  Lo! I send to that place a commander, swift, brave,
  immortal; 

And with him horse and foot&#8212;and parks of artillery,
And artillerymen, the deadliest that ever fired gun.





LEAVES OF GRASS.



1.

THERE was a child went forth every day;

  And the first object he look'd upon, that object he be-
  came; 


  And that object became part of him for the day, or a 
  certain part of the day, or for many years, or 
  stretching cycles of years.



The early lilacs became part of this child,

  And grass, and white and red morning-glories, and 
  white and red clover, and the song of the phoebe-
  bird,


  And the Third-month lambs, and the sow's pink-faint 
  litter, and the mare's foal, and the cow's calf,


  And the noisy brood of the barn-yard, or by the mire 
  of the pond-side,


  And the fish suspending themselves so curiously below 
  there&#8212;and the beautiful curious liquid,


  And the water-plants with their graceful flat heads&#8212; 
  all became part of him.




  The field-sprouts of Fourth-month and Fifth-month 
  became part of him; 


  Winter-grain sprouts, and those of the light-yellow 
  corn, and the esculent roots of the garden,


  And the apple-trees cover'd with blossoms, and the 
  fruit afterward, and wood-berries, and the com-
  monest weeds by the road; 





  And the old drunkard staggering home from the out-
  house of the tavern, whence he had lately risen,


  And the school-mistress that pass'd on her way to the 
  school,


  And the friendly boys that pass'd&#8212;and the quarrel-
  some boys,


  And the tidy and fresh-cheek'd girls&#8212;and the bare-
  foot negro boy and girl,


  And all the changes of city and country, wherever he 
  went.



His own parents;

  He that had father'd him, and she that had conceiv'd 
  him in her womb, and birth'd him,

They gave this child more of themselves than that;

  They gave him afterward every day&#8212;they became part 
  of him.




  The mother at home, quietly placing the dishes on 
  the supper-table; 


  The mother with mild words&#8212;clean her cap and gown.
  a wholesome odor falling off her person and 
  clothes as she walks by; 


  The father, strong, self-sufficient, manly, mean, anger'd.
  unjust; 


  The blow, the quick loud word, the tight bargain, the 
  crafty lure,


  The family usages, the language, the company, the fur-
  niture&#8212;the yearning and swelling heart,


  Affection that will not be gainsay'd&#8212;the sense of what 
  is real&#8212;the thought if, after all, it should prove 
  unreal,


  The doubts of day-time and the doubts of night-time 
  &#8212;the curious whether and how,


  Whether that which appears so is so, or is it all flashes 
  and specks?


  Men and women crowding fast in the streets&#8212;if they 
  are not flashes and specks, what are they?





  The streets themselves, and the fa&#231;ades of houses, and 
  goods in the windows,


  Vehicles, teams, the heavy-plank'd wharves&#8212;the 
  huge crossing at the ferries,


  The village on the highland, seen from afar at sun-
  set&#8212;the river between,


  Shadows, aureola and mist, light falling on roofs and 
  gables of white or brown, three miles off,


  The schooner near by, sleepily dropping down the 
  tide&#8212;the little boat slack-tow'd astern,


  The hurrying tumbling waves, quick-broken crests,
  slapping,


  The strata of color'd clouds, the long bar of maroon-
  tint, away solitary by itself&#8212;the spread of pur-
  ity it lies motionless in,


  The horizon's edge, the flying sea-crow, the fragrance 
  of salt-marsh and shore-mud; 


  These became part of that child who went forth every 
  day, and who now goes, and will always go forth 
  every day.







2.


MYSELF and mine gymnastic ever,

  To stand the cold or heat&#8212;to take good aim with a 
  gun&#8212;to sail a boat&#8212;to manage horses&#8212;to be-
  get superb children,


  To speak readily and clearly&#8212;to feel at home among 
  common people,


  And to hold our own in terrible positions, on land 
  and sea.



Not for an embroiderer;

  (There will always be plenty of embroiderers&#8212;I wel-
  come them also;)


  But for the fibre of things, and for inherent men and 
  women.



Not to chisel ornaments,




  But to chisel with free stroke the heads and limbs of 
  plenteous Supreme Gods, that The States may 
  realize them, walking and talking.



Let me have my own way;

  Let others promulge the laws&#8212;I will make no account 
  of the laws; 


  Let others praise eminent men and hold up peace&#8212; 
  I hold up agitation and conflict; 


  I praise no eminent man&#8212;I rebuke to his face the one 
  that was thought most worthy.




  (Who are you? you mean devil! And what are you 
  secretly guilty of, all your life?


  Will you turn aside all your life? Will you grub and 
  chatter all your life?)




  (And who are you&#8212;blabbing by rote, years, pages,
  languages, reminiscences,


  Unwitting to-day that you do not know how to speak 
  a single word?)




  Let others finish specimens&#8212;I never finish speci-
  mens; 


  I shower them by exhaustless laws, as nature does,
  fresh and modern continually.



I give nothing as duties;
What others give as duties, I give as living impulses;
(Shall I give the heart's action as a duty?)



  Let others dispose of questions&#8212;I dispose of noth-
  ing&#8212;I arouse unanswerable questions; 

Who are they I see and touch, and what about them?

  What about these likes of myself, that draw me so close 
  by tender directions and indirections?




  I call to the world to distrust the accounts of my 
  friends, but listen to my enemies&#8212;as I myself do; 





  I charge you, too, forever, reject those who would ex-
  pound me&#8212;for I cannot expound myself; 


  I charge that there be no theory or school founded out 
  of me; 

I charge you to leave all free, as I have left all free.


After me, vista!
O, I see life is not short, but immeasurably long;

  I henceforth tread the world, chaste, temperate, an 
  early riser, a steady grower,


  Every hour the semen of centuries&#8212;and still of cen-
  turies.




  I will follow up these continual lessons of the air,
  water, earth; 

I perceive I have no time to lose.






3.


WHO learns my lesson complete?

  Boss, journeyman, apprentice&#8212;churchman and athe-
  ist,


  The stupid and the wise thinker&#8212;parents and off-
  spring&#8212;merchant, clerk, porter, and customer,


  Editor, author, artist, and schoolboy&#8212;Draw nigh and 
  commence; 

It is no lesson&#8212;it lets down the bars to a good lesson,
And that to another, and every one to another still.


The great laws take and effuse without argument;
I am of the same style, for I am their friend,

  I love them quits and quits&#8212;I do not halt and make 
  salaams.




  I lie abstracted, and hear beautiful tales of things,
  and the reasons of things 

They are so beautiful, I nudge myself to listen.






  I cannot say to any person what I hear&#8212;I cannot 
  say it to myself&#8212;it is very wonderful.




  It is no small matter, this round and delicious globe.
  moving so exactly in its orbit forever and ever,
  without one jolt, or the untruth of a single 
  second; 


  I do not think it was made in six days, nor in ten 
  thousand years, nor ten billions of years,


  Nor plann'd and built one thing after another, as an 
  architect plans and builds a house.




  I do not think seventy years is the time of a man or 
  woman,


  Nor that seventy millions of years is the time of a 
  man or woman,


  Nor that years will ever stop the existence of me, or 
  any one else.




  Is it wonderful that I should be immortal? as every 
  one is immortal; 


  I know it is wonderful&#8212;but my eye-sight is equally 
  wonderful, and how I was conceived in my 
  mother's womb is equally wonderful; 


  And pass'd from a babe, in the creeping trance of 
  a couple of summers and winters, to articulate 
  and walk&#8212;All this is equally wonderful.




  And that my Soul embraces you this hour, and we 
  affect each other without ever seeing each other,
  and never perhaps to see each other, is every 
  bit as wonderful.




  And that I can think such thoughts as these, is just 
  as wonderful; 


  And that I can remind you, and you think them and 
  know them to be true, is just as wonderful.







  And that the moon spins round the earth, and on 
  with the earth, is equally wonderful; 


  And that they balance themselves with the sun and 
  stars, is equally wonderful.







4.



  WHOEVER you are, I fear you are walking the walks of 
  dreams,


  I fear those supposed realities are to melt from under 
  your feet and hands; 


  Even now, your features, joys, speech, house, trade,
  manners, troubles, follies, costume, crimes,
  dissipate away from you,

Your true Soul and Body appear before me,

  They stand forth out of affairs&#8212;out of commerce,
  shops, law, science, work, farms, clothes, the 
  house, medicine, print, buying, selling, eating,
  drinking, suffering, dying.




  Whoever you are, now I place my hand upon you,
  that you be my poem; 

I whisper with my lips close to your ear,

  I have loved many women and men, but I love none 
  better than you.



O I have been dilatory and dumb;
I should have made my way straight to you long ago;

  I should have blabb'd nothing but you, I should have 
  chanted nothing but you.




  I will leave all, and come and make the hymns of 
  you; 

None have understood you, but I understand you;

  None have done justice to you&#8212;you have not done 
  justice to yourself; 





  None but have found you imperfect&#8212;I only find no 
  imperfection in you;  


  None but would subordinate you&#8212;I only am he who 
  will never consent to subordinate you; 


  I only am he who places over you no master, owner,
  better, God, beyond what waits intrinsically in 
  yourself.




  Painters have painted their swarming groups, and 
  the centre figure of all; 


  From the head of the centre figure spreading a nim-
  bus of gold-color'd light; 


  But I paint myriads of heads, but paint no head with-
  out its nimbus of gold-color'd light; 


  From my hand, from the brain of every man and 
  woman it streams, effulgently flowing forever.




  O I could sing such grandeurs and glories about 
  you!


  You have not known what you are&#8212;you have slum-
  ber'd upon yourself all your life; 


  Your eye-lids have been the same as closed most of 
  the time; 

What you have done returns already in mockeries;

  (Your thrift, knowledge, prayers, if they do not return 
  in mockeries, what is their return?)



The mockeries are not you;
Underneath them, and within them, I see you lurk;
I pursue you where none else has pursued you;

  Silence, the desk, the flippant expression, the night,
  the accustom'd routine, if these conceal you from 
  others, or from yourself, they do not conceal you 
  from me; 


  The shaved face, the unsteady eye, the impure com-
  plexion, if these balk others, they do not balk 
  me,


  The pert apparel, the deform'd attitude, drunkenness,
  greed, premature death, all these I part aside.







  There is no endowment in man or woman that is 
  not tallied in you; 


  There is no virtue, no beauty, in man or woman, but as 
  good is in you; 


  No pluck, no endurance in others, but as good is in 
  you; 


  No pleasure waiting for others, but an equal pleasure 
  waits for you.




  As for me, I give nothing to any one, except I give 
  the like carefully to you; 


  I sing the songs of the glory of none, not God, sooner 
  than I sing the songs of the glory of you.



Whoever you are! claim your own at any hazard!

  These shows of the east and west are tame compared 
  to you; 


  These immense meadows&#8212;these interminable rivers&#8212; 
  you are immense and interminable as they; 


  These furies, elements, storms, motions of Nature,
  throes of apparent dissolution&#8212;you are he or 
  she who is master or mistress over them,


  Master or mistress in your own right over Nature,
  elements, pain, passion, dissolution.




  The hopples fall from your ankles&#8212;you find an un-
  failing sufficiency; 


  Old or young, male or female, rude, low, rejected by 
  the rest, whatever you are promulges itself; 


  Through birth, life, death, burial, the means are pro-
  vided, nothing is scanted; 


  Through angers, losses, ambition, ignorance, ennui,
  what you are picks it way.









BEGINNERS.

  How they are provided for upon the earth, (appearing 
  at intervals;)

How dear and dreadful they are to the earth;

  How they inure to themselves as much as to any&#8212; 
  What a paradox appears, their age; 

How people respond to them, yet know them not;

  How there is something relentless in their fate, all 
  times; 


  How all times mischoose the objects of their adulation 
  and reward,


  And how the same inexorable price must still be paid 
  for the same great purchase.




TESTS.

  ALL submit to them, where they sit, inner, secure,
  unapproachable to analysis, in the Soul; 


  Not traditions&#8212;not the outer authorities are the 
  judges&#8212;they are the judges of outer authori-
  ties, and of all traditions; 


  They corroborate as they go, only whatever corrobo-
  rates themselves, and touches themselves; 


  For all that, they have it forever in themselves to 
  corroborate far and near, without one excep-
  tion.




PERFECTIONS.

  ONLY themselves understand themselves, and the like 
  of themselves,

As Souls only understand Souls.






SONG OF THE BROAD-AXE.

1

WEAPON, shapely, naked, wan;
Head from the mother's bowels drawn!

  Wooded flesh and metal bone! limb only one, and lip 
  only one!


  Gray-blue leaf by red-heat grown! helve produced from 
  a little seed sown!

Resting the grass amid and upon,
To be lean'd, and to lean on.



  Strong shapes, and attributes of strong shapes&#8212; 
  masculine trades, sights and sounds; 

Long varied train of an emblem, dabs of music;

  Fingers of the organist skipping staccato over the keys 
  of the great organ.




2

Welcome are all earth's lands, each for its kind;
Welcome are lands of pine and oak;
Welcome are lands of the lemon and fig;
Welcome are lands of gold;

  Welcome are lands of wheat and maize&#8212;welcome 
  those of the grape; 

Welcome are lands of sugar and rice;

  Welcome the cotton-lands&#8212;welcome those of the white 
  potato and sweet potato; 

Welcome are mountains, flats, sands, forests, prairies;

  Welcome the rich borders of rivers, table-lands,
  openings; 





  Welcome the measureless grazing-lands&#8212;welcome the 
  teeming soil of orchards, flax, honey, hemp; 


  Welcome just as much the other more hard-faced 
  lands; 

Lands rich as lands of gold, or wheat and fruit lands;
Lands of mines, lands of the manly and rugged ores;
Lands of coal, copper, lead, tin, zinc;
LANDS OF IRON! lands of the make of the axe!



3

The log at the wood-pile, the axe supported by it;

  The sylvan hut, the vine over the doorway, the space 
  clear'd for a garden,


  The irregular tapping of rain down on the leaves,
  after the storm is lull'd,


  The wailing and moaning at intervals, the thought of 
  the sea,


  The thought of ships struck in the storm, and put on 
  their beam-ends, and the cutting away of 
  masts; 


  The sentiment of the huge timbers of old-fashion'd 
  houses and barns; 


  The remember'd print or narrative, the voyage at a 
  venture of men, families, goods,

The disembarkation, the founding of a new city,

  The voyage of those who sought a New England and 
  found it&#8212;the outset anywhere,


  The settlements of the Arkansas, Colorado, Ottawa,
  Willamette,


  The slow progress, the scant fare, the axe, rifle, saddle-
  bags; 

The beauty of all adventurous and daring persons,

  The beauty of wood-boys and wood-men, with their 
  clear untrimm'd faces,


  The beauty of independence, departure, actions that 
  rely on themselves,


  The American contempt for statutes and ceremonies,
  the boundless impatience of restraint,





  The loose drift of character, the inkling through ran-
  dom types, the solidification; 


  The butcher in the slaughter-house, the hands aboard 
  schooners and sloops, the raftsman, the pioneer,


  Lumbermen in their winter camp, day-break in the 
  woods, stripes of snow on the limbs of trees,
  the occasional snapping,


  The glad clear sound of one's own voice, the merry 
  song, the natural life of the woods, the strong 
  day's work,


  The blazing fire at night, the sweet taste of supper 
  the talk, the bed of hemlock boughs, and the 
  bear-skin; 

&#8212;The house-builder at work in cities or anywhere,
The preparatory jointing, squaring, sawing, mortising,

  The hoist-up of beams, the push of them in their 
  places, laying them regular,


  Setting the studs by their tenons in the mortises, ac-
  cording as they were prepared,


  The blows of mallets and hammers, the attitudes of 
  the men, their curv'd limbs,


  Bending, standing, astride the beams, driving in pins,
  holding on by posts and braces,


  The hook'd arm over the plate, the other arm wielding 
  the axe,

The floor-men forcing the planks close, to be nail'd,

  Their postures bringing their weapons downward on 
  the bearers,

The echoes resounding through the vacant building;

  The huge store-house carried up in the city, well 
  under way,


  The six framing-men, two in the middle, and two at 
  each end, carefully bearing on their shoulders 
  a heavy stick for a cross-beam,


  The crowded line of masons with trowels in their 
  right hands, rapidly laying the long side-wall,
  two hundred feet from front to rear,


  The flexible rise and fall of backs, the continual click 
  of the trowels striking the bricks,





  The bricks, one after another, each laid so workman-
  like in its place, and set with a knock of the 
  trowel-handle,


  The piles of materials, the mortar on the mortar-
  boards, and the steady replenishing by the hod-
  men; 


  &#8212;Spar-makers in the spar-yard, the swarming row of 
  well-grown apprentices,


  The swing of their axes on the square-hew'd log,
  shaping it toward the shape of a mast,


  The brisk short crackle of the steel driven slantingly 
  into the pine,


  The butter-color'd chips flying off in great flakes and 
  slivers,


  The limber motion of brawny young arms and hips in 
  easy costumes; 


  The constructor of wharves, bridges, piers, bulk-heads,
  floats, stays against the sea; 


  &#8212;The city fireman&#8212;the fire that suddenly bursts forth 
  in the close-pack'd square,


  The arriving engines, the hoarse shouts, the nimble 
  stepping and daring,


  The strong command through the fire-trumpets, the 
  falling in line, the rise and fall of the arms 
  forcing the water,


  The slender, spasmic blue-white jets&#8212;the bringing to 
  bear of the hooks and ladders, and their 
  execution,


  The crash and cut away of connecting wood-work, or 
  through floors, if the fire smoulders under 
  them,


  The crowd with their lit faces, watching&#8212;the glare 
  and dense shadows; 


  &#8212;The forger at his forge-furnace, and the user of iron 
  after him,


  The maker of the axe large and small, and the welder 
  and temperer,


  The chooser breathing his breath on the cold steel.
  and trying the edge with his thumb,





  The one who clean-shapes the handle and sets it 
  firmly in the socket; 


  The shadowy processions of the portraits of the past 
  users also,


  The primal patient mechanics, the architects and 
  engineers,

The far-off Assyrian edifice and Mizra edifice,
The Roman lictors preceding the consuls,
The antique European warrior with his axe in combat,

  The uplifted arm, the clatter of blows on the helmeted 
  head,


  The death-howl, the limpsey tumbling body, the rush 
  of friend and foe thither,

The seige of revolted lieges determin'd for liberty,

  The summons to surrender, the battering at castle 
  gates, the truce and parley; 

The sack of an old city in its time,

  The bursting in of mercenaries and bigots tumultuously 
  and disorderly,

Roar, flames, blood, drunkenness, madness,

  Goods freely rifled from houses and temples, screams 
  of women in the gripe of brigands,


  Craft and thievery of camp-followers, men running, old 
  persons despairing,

The hell of war, the cruelties of creeds,

  The list of all executive deeds and words, just or un-
  just,

The power of personality, just or unjust.



4

Muscle and pluck forever!
What invigorates life, invigorates death,
And the dead advance as much as the living advance,
And the future is no more uncertain than the present,

  And the roughness of the earth and of man encloses 
  as much as the delicatesse of the earth and of 
  man,

And nothing endures but personal qualities.





What do you think endures?
Do you think the great city endures?

  Or a teeming manufacturing state? or a prepared con-
  stitution? or the best built steamships?


  Or hotels of granite and iron? or any chef-d'eouvres of 
  engineering, forts, armaments?



Away! These are not to be cherish'd for themselves;

  They fill their hour, the dancers dance, the musicians 
  play for them; 

The show passes, all does well enough of course,
All does very well till one flash of defiance.



  The great city is that which has the greatest man or 
  woman; 


  If it be a few ragged huts, it is still the greatest city in 
  the whole world.




5


  The place where the great city stands is not the 
  place of stretch'd wharves, docks, manufactures,
  deposits of produce,


  Nor the place of ceaseless salutes of new comers, or 
  the anchor-lifters of the departing,


  Nor the place of the tallest and costliest buildings, or 
  shops selling goods from the rest of the earth,


  Nor the place of the best libraries and schools&#8212;nor 
  the place where money is plentiest,

Nor the place of the most numerous population.



  Where the city stands with the brawniest breed of 
  orators and bards; 


  Where the city stands that is beloved by these, and 
  loves them in return, and understands them; 


  Where no monuments exist to heroes, but in the 
  common words and deeds; 


  Where thrift is in its place, and prudence is in its 
  place; 




Where the men and women think lightly of the laws;
Where the slave ceases, and the master of slaves ceases;

  Where the populace rise at once against the never-
  ending audacity of elected persons; 


  Where fierce men and women pour forth, as the sea 
  to the whistle of death pours its sweeping and 
  unript waves; 


  Where outside authority enters always after the pre-
  cedence of inside authority; 


  Where the citizen is always the head and ideal&#8212;and 
  President, Mayor, Governor, and what not, are 
  agents for pay; 


  Where children are taught to be laws to themselves,
  and to depend on themselves; 

Where equanimity is illustrated in affairs;
Where speculations on the Soul are encouraged;

  Where women walk in public processions in the streets,
  the same as the men,


  Where they enter the public assembly and take places 
  the same as the men; 

Where the city of the faithfulest friends stands;
Where the city of the cleanliness of the sexes stands;
Where the city of the healthiest fathers stands;
Where the city of the best-bodied mothers stands,
There the great city stands.



6


  How beggarly appear arguments, before a defiant 
  deed!


  How the floridness of the materials of cities shrivels 
  before a man's or woman's look!




  All waits, or goes by default, till a strong being ap-
  pears; 


  A strong being is the proof of the race, and of the 
  ability of the universe; 

When he or she appears, materials are overaw'd,
The dispute on the Soul stops,




  The old customs and phrases are confronted, turn'd 
  back, or laid away.




  What is your money-making now? What can it do 
  now?

What is your respectability now?

  What are your theology, tuition, society, traditions,
  statute-books, now?

Where are your jibes of being now?
Where are your cavils about the Soul now?



  Was that your best? Were those your vast and 
  solid?


  Riches, opinions, politics, institutions, to part obedi-
  ently from the path of one man or woman!


  The centuries, and all authority, to be trod under the 
  foot-soles of one man or woman!




7


  A sterile landscape covers the ore&#8212;there is as good 
  as the best, for all the forbidding appearance; 

There is the mine, there are the miners;

  The forge-furnace is there, the melt is accomplish'd; 
  the hammers-men are at hand with their tongs 
  and hammers; 

What always served and always serves, is at hand.



  Than this nothing has better served&#8212;it has served 
  all: 


  Served the fluent-tongued and subtle-sensed Greek,
  and long ere the Greek: 


  Served in building the buildings that last longer than 
  any; 


  Served the Hebrew, the Persian, the most ancient 
  Hindostanee; 


  Served the mound-raiser on the Mississippi&#8212;served 
  those whose relics remain in Central America; 





  Served Albic temples in woods or on plains, with un-
  hewn pillars, and the druids; 


  Served the artificial clefts, vast, high, silent, on the 
  snow-cover'd hills of Scandinavia; 


  Served those who, time out of mind, made on the 
  granite walls rough sketches of the sun, moon,
  stars, ships, ocean-waves; 


  Served the paths of the irruptions of the Goths&#8212; 
  served the pastoral tribes and nomads; 


  Served the long, long distant Kelt&#8212;served the hardy 
  pirates of the Baltic; 


  Served before any of those, the venerable and harm-
  less men of Ethiopia; 


  Served the making of helms for the galleys of plea-
  sure, and the making of those for war; 


  Served all great works on land, and all great works on 
  the sea; 

For the medi&#230;val ages, and before the medi&#230;val ages;

  Served not the living only, then as now, but served the 
  dead.




8

I see the European headsman;

  He stands mask'd, clothed in red, with huge legs, and 
  strong naked arms,

And leans on a ponderous axe.



  Whom have you slaughter'd lately, European heads-
  man?

Whose is that blood upon you, so wet and sticky?


I see the clear sunsets of the martyrs;
I see from the scaffolds the descending ghosts,

  Ghosts of dead lords, uncrown'd ladies, impeach'd 
  ministers, rejected kings,


  Rivals, traitors, poisoners, disgraced chieftains, and 
  the rest.







  I see those who in any land have died for the 
  good cause; 


  The seed is spare, nevertheless the crop shall never run 
  out; 


  (Mind you, O foreign kings, O priests, the crop shall 
  never run out.)



I see the blood wash'd entirely away from the axe;
Both blade and helve are clean;

  They spirt no more the blood of European nobles&#8212; 
  they clasp no more the necks of queens.



I see the headsman withdraw and become useless;

  I see the scaffold untrodden and mouldy&#8212;I see no 
  longer any axe upon it; 


  I see the mighty and friendly emblem of the power of 
  my own race&#8212;the newest, largest race.




9

&amp; America! I do not vaunt my love for you;
I have what I have.


The axe leaps!
The solid forest gives fluid utterances;
They tumble forth, they rise and form,
Hut, tent, landing, survey,
Flail, plough, pick, crowbar, spade,
Shingle, rail, prop, wainscot, jamb, lath, panel, gable,

  Citadel, ceiling, saloon, academy, organ, exhibition-
  house, library,


  Cornice, trellis, pilaster, balcony, window, shutter, tur-
  ret, porch,


  Hoe, rake, pitch-fork, pencil, wagon, staff, saw, jack-
  plane, mallet, wedge, rounce,

Chair, tub, hoop, table, wicket, vane, sash, floor,

  Work-box, chest, string'd instrument, boat, frame, and 
  what not,

Capitols of States, and capitol of the nation of States,




  Long stately rows in avenues, hospitals for orphans, or 
  for the poor or sick,


  Manhattan steamboats and clippers, taking the meas-
  ure of all seas.



The shapes arise!

  Shapes of the using of axes anyhow, and the users,
  and all that neighbors them,


  Cutters down of wood, and haulers of it to the Penob-
  scot or Kennebec,


  Dwellers in cabins among the Californian mountains,
  or by the little lakes, or on the Columbia,


  Dwellers south on the banks of the Gila or Rio Grande 
  &#8212;friendly gatherings, the characters and fun,


  Dwellers up north in Minnesota and by the Yellow-
  stone river&#8212;dwellers on coasts and off coasts,


  Seal-fishers, whalers, arctic seamen breaking passages 
  through the ice.



The shapes arise!
Shapes of factories, arsenals, foundries, markets;
Shapes of the two-threaded tracks of railroads;

  Shapes of the sleepers of bridges, vast frameworks,
  girders, arches; 


  Shapes of the fleets of barges, tows, lake craft, river 
  craft.



The shapes arise!

  Ship-yards and dry-docks along the Eastern and West-
  ern Seas, and in many a bay and by-place,


  The live-oak kelsons, the pine planks, the spars, the 
  hackmatack-roots for knees,


  The ships themselves on their ways, the tiers of scaf-
  folds, the workmen busy outside and inside,


  The tools lying around, the great auger and little au-
  ger, the adze, bolt, line, square, gouge, and bead-
  plane.







10

The shapes arise!
The shape measur'd, saw'd, jack'd, join'd, stain'd,

  The coffin-shape for the dead to lie within in his 
  shroud; 


  The shape got out in posts, in the bedstead posts, in 
  the posts of the bride's bed; 


  The shape of the little trough, the shape of the rockers 
  beneath, the shape of the babe's cradle; 


  The shape of the floor-planks, the floor-planks for 
  dancers' feet; 


  The shape of the planks of the family home, the 
  home of the friendly parents and children,


  The shape of the roof of the home of the happy 
  young man and woman, the roof over the well-
  married young man and woman,


  The roof over the supper joyously cook'd by the chaste 
  wife, and joyously eaten by the chaste husband,
  content after his day's work.



The shapes arise!

  The shape of the prisoner's place in the court-room,
  and of him or her seated in the place; 


  The shape of the liquor-bar lean'd against by the 
  young rum-drinker and the old rum drinker; 


  The shape of the shamed and angry stairs, trod by 
  sneaking footsteps; 


  The shape of the sly settee, and the adulterous un-
  wholesome couple; 


  The shape of the gambling-board with its devilish 
  winnings and losings; 


  The shape of the step-ladder for the convicted and 
  sentenced murderer, the murderer with hag-
  gard face and pinion'd arms,


  The sheriff at hand with his deputies, the silent and 
  white-lipp'd crowd, the sickening dangling of 
  the rope.






The shapes arise!
Shapes of doors giving many exits and entrances;

  The door passing the dissever'd friend, flush'd and in 
  haste; 

The door that admits good news and bad news;

  The door whence the son left home, confident and 
  puff'd up; 


  The door he enter'd again from a long and scandalous 
  absence, diseas'd, broken down, without inno-
  cence, without means.




11

Her shape arises,

  She, less guarded than ever, yet more guarded than 
  ever; 


  The gross and soil'd she moves among do not make 
  her gross and soil'd; 


  She knows the thoughts as she passes&#8212;nothing is con-
  ceal'd from her; 

She is none the less considerate or friendly therefor;

  She is the best-beloved&#8212;it is without exception&#8212;she 
  has no reason to fear, and she does not fear; 


  Oaths, quarrels, hiccupp'd songs, smutty expressions,
  are idle to her as she passes; 


  She is silent&#8212;she is possess'd of herself&#8212;they do not 
  offend her; 


  She receives them as the laws of nature receive them 
  &#8212;she is strong,


  She too is a law of nature&#8212;there is no law stronger 
  than she is.




12

The main shapes arise!
Shapes of Democracy, total&#8212;result of centuries;
Shapes, ever projecting other shapes;

  Shapes of a hundred Free States, begetting another 
  hundred; 

Shapes of turbulent manly cities;
Shapes of the women fit for These States,




  Shapes of the friends and home-givers of the whole 
  earth,


  Shapes bracing the earth, and braced with the whole 
  earth.






WITH ANTECEDENTS.


WITH antecedents;

  With my fathers and mothers, and the accumulations 
  of past ages; 


  With all which, had it not been, I would not now be 
  here, as I am: 

With Egypt, India, Phenicia, Greece and Rome;

  With the Kelt, the Scandinavian, the Alb, and the 
  Saxon; 


  With antique maritime ventures,&#8212;with laws, artizan-
  ship, wars and journeys; 


  With the poet, the skald, the saga, the myth, and the 
  oracle; 


  With the sale of slaves&#8212;with enthusiasts&#8212;with the 
  troubadour, the crusader, and the monk; 


  With those old continents whence we have come to this 
  new continent; 

With the fading kingdoms and kings over there;
With the fading religions and priests;

  With the small shores we look back to from our own 
  large and present shores; 


  With countless years drawing themselves onward, and 
  arrived at these years; 


  You and Me arrived&#8212;America arrived, and making 
  this year; 


  This year! sending itself ahead countless years to 
  come.






O but it is not the years&#8212;it is I&#8212;it is You;
We touch all laws, and tally all antecedents;

  We are the skald, the oracle, the monk, and the 
  knight&#8212;we easily include them, and more; 


  We stand amid time, beginningless and endless&#8212;we 
  stand amid evil and good; 


  All swings around us&#8212;there is as much darkness as 
  light; 


  The very sun swings itself and its system of planets 
  around us: 

Its sun, and its again, all swing around us.



  As for me, (torn, stormy, even as I, amid these ve-
  hement days;)

I have the idea of all, and am all, and believe in all;

  I believe materialism is true, and spiritualism is true&#8212; 
  I reject no part.



Have I forgotten any part?

  Come to me, whoever and whatever, till I give you 
  recognition.
         



  I respect Assyria, China, Teutonia, and the He-
  brews; 

I adopt each theory, myth, god, and demi-god;

  I see that the old accounts, bibles, genealogies, are 
  true, without exception; 


  I assert that all past days were what they should have 
  been; 


  And that they could no-how have been better than 
  they were,


  And that to-day is what it should be&#8212;and that 
  America is,


  And that to-day and America could no-how be better 
  than they are.




  In the name of These States, and in your and my 
  name, the Past,





  And in the name of These States, and in your and my 
  name, the Present time.




  I know that the past was great, and the future will 
  be great,


  And I know that both curiously conjoint in the pres-
  ent time,


  (For the sake of him I typify&#8212;for the common aver-
  age man's sake&#8212;your sake, if you are he;)


  And that where I am, or you are, this present day,
  there is the centre of all days, all races,


  And there is the meaning, to us, of all that has ever 
  come of races and days, or ever will come.





SAVANTISM.

  THITHER, as I look, I see each result and glory re-
  tracing itself and nestling close, always obli-
  gated; 


  Thither hours, months, years&#8212;thither trades, com-
  pacts, establishments, even the most minute; 


  Thither every-day life, speech, utensils, politics, per-
  sons, estates; 


  Thither we also, I with my leaves and songs, trustful,
  admirant,


  As a father, to his father going, takes his children 
  along with him.







CROSSING BROOKLYN FERRY.


FLOOD-TIDE below me! I watch you face to face;

  Clouds of the west! sun there half an hour high! I see 
  you also face to face.




  Crowds of men and women attired in the usual cos-
  tumes! how curious you are to me!


  On the ferry-boats, the hundreds and hundreds that 
  cross, returning home, are more curious to me 
  than you suppose; 


  And you that shall cross from shore to shore years hence,
  are more to me, and more in my meditations,
  than you might suppose.




  The impalpable sustenance of me from all things, at 
  all hours of the day; 


  The simple, compact, well-join'd scheme&#8212;myself dis-
  integrated, every one disintegrated, yet part of 
  the scheme; 

The similitudes of the past, and those of the future;

  The glories strung like beads on my smallest sights and 
  hearings&#8212;on the walk in the street, and the 
  passage over the river; 


  The current rushing so swiftly, and swimming with me 
  far away; 


  The others that are to follow me, the ties between me 
  and them; 


  The certainty of others&#8212;the life, love, sight, hearing 
  of others.







  Others will enter the gates of the ferry, and cross 
  from shore to shore; 

Others will watch the run of the flood-tide;

  Others will see the shipping of Manhattan north and 
  west, and the heights of Brooklyn to the south 
  and east; 

Others will see the islands large and small;

  Fifty years hence, others will see them as they cross,
  the sun half an hour high; 


  A hundred years hence, or ever so many hundred years 
  hence, others will see them,


  Will enjoy the sunset, the pouring in of the flood-tide,
  the falling back to the sea of the ebb-tide.




  It avails not, neither time or place&#8212;distance avails 
  not; 


  I am with you, you men and women of a generation,
  or ever so many generations hence; 


  I project myself&#8212;also I return&#8212;I am with you, and 
  know how it is.




  Just as you feel when you look on the river and sky 
  so I felt; 


  Just as any of you is one of a living crowd, I was one 
  of a crowd; 


  Just as you are refresh'd by the gladness of the river 
  and the bright flow, I was refresh'd; 


  Just as you stand and lean on the rail, yet hurry with 
  the swift current, I stood, yet was hurried; 


  Just as you look on the numberless masts of ships, and 
  the thick-stem'd pipes of steamboats, I look'd.




  I too many and many a time cross'd the river, the 
  sun half an hour high; 


  I watched the Twelfth-month sea-gulls&#8212;I saw them 
  high in the air, floating with motionless wings,
  oscillating their bodies,





  I saw how the glistening yellow lit up parts of their 
  bodies, and left the rest in strong shadow,


  I saw the slow-wheeling circles, and the gradual edging 
  toward the south.




  I too saw the reflection of the summer sky in the 
  water,


  Had my eyes dazzled by the shimmering track of 
  beams,


  Look'd at the fine centrifugal spokes of light round the 
  shape of my head in the sun-lit water,


  Look'd on the haze on the hills southward and south-
  westward,


  Look'd on the vapor as it flew in fleeces tinged with 
  violet,


  Look'd toward the lower bay to notice the arriving 
  ships,

Saw their approach, saw aboard those that were near me,

  Saw the white sails of schooners and sloops, saw the 
  ships at anchor,


  The sailors at work in the rigging, or out astride the 
  spars,


  The round masts, the swinging motion of the hulls, the 
  slender serpentine pennants,


  The large and small steamers in motion, the pilots in 
  their pilot-houses,


  The white wake left by the passage, the quick trem-
  ulous whirl of the wheels,

The flags of all nations, the falling of them at sun-set,

  The scallop-edged waves in the twilight, the ladled 
  cups, the frolicsome crests and glistening,


  The stretch afar growing dimmer and dimmer, the gray 
  walls of the granite store-houses by the docks,


  On the river the shadowy group, the big steam-tug 
  closely flank'd on each side by the barges&#8212;the 
  hay-boat, the belated lighter,


  On the neighboring shore, the fires from the foundry 
  chimneys burning high and glaringly into the 
  night,





   Casting their flicker of black, contrasted with wild red 
  and yellow light, over the tops of houses, and 
  down into the clefts of streets.




  These, and all else, were to me the same as they are 
  to you; 

I project myself a moment to tell you&#8212;also I return.


I loved well those cities;
I loved well the stately and rapid river;
The men and women I saw were all near to me;

  Others the same&#8212;others who look back on me, because 
  I look'd forward to them; 


  (The time will come, though I stop here to-day and 
  to-night.)



What is it, then, between us?

  What is the count of the scores or hundreds of years 
  between us?




  Whatever it is, it avails not&#8212;distance avails not,
  and place avails not.



I too lived&#8212;Brooklyn, of ample hills, was mine;

  I too walked the streets of Manhattan Island, and 
  bathed in the waters around it; 


  I too felt the curious abrupt questionings stir within 
  me,


  In the day, among crowds of people, sometimes they 
  came upon me,


  In my walks home late at night, or as I lay in my bed,
  they came upon me.




  I too had been struck from the float forever held in 
  solution; 

I too had receiv'd identity by my Body;

  That I was, I knew was of my body&#8212;and what I 
  should be, I knew I should be of my body.






It is not upon you alone the dark patches fall,
The dark threw patches down upon me also;

  The best I had done seem'd to me blank and sus-
  picious; 


  My great thoughts, as I supposed them, were they not 
  in reality meagre? would not people laugh at 
  me?



It is not you alone who know what it is to be evil;
I am he who knew what it was to be evil;
I too knitted the old knot of contrariety,
Blabb'd, blush'd, resented, lied, stole, grudg'd,

  Had guile, anger, lust, hot wishes I dared not 
  speak,


  Was wayward, vain, greedy, shallow, sly, cowardly,
  malignant,; 

The wolf, the snake, the hog, not wanting in me,

  The cheating look, the frivolous word, the adulterous 
  wish, not wanting,


  Refusals, hates, postponements, meanness, laziness,
  none of these wanting.



But I was Manhattanese, friendly and proud!

  I was call'd by my nighest name by clear loud voices 
  of young men as they saw me approaching or 
  passing,


  Felt their arms on my neck as I stood, or the negligent 
  leaning of their flesh against me as I sat,


  Saw many I loved in the street, or ferry-boat, or public 
  assembly, yet never told them a word,


  Lived the same life with the rest, the same old laugh-
  ing, gnawing, sleeping,


  Play'd the part that still looks back on the actor or 
  actress,


  The same old role, the role that is what we make it,
  as great as we like,

Or as small as we like, or both great and small.





Closer yet I approach you;

  What thought you have of me, I had as much of you 
  &#8212;I laid in my stores in advance; 


  I consider'd long and seriously of you before you were 
  born.



Who was to know what should come home to me?
Who knows but I am enjoying this?

  Who knows but I am as good as looking at you now,
  for all you cannot see me?



It is not you alone, nor I alone;

  Not a few races, nor a few generations, nor a few 
  centuries; 


  It is that each came, or comes, or shall come, from its 
  due emission, without fail, either now, or then,
  or henceforth.




  Every thing indicates&#8212;the smallest does, and the 
  largest does; 


  A necessary film envelops all, and envelops the Soul 
  for a proper time.




  Now I am curious what sight can ever be more stately 
  and admirable to me than my mast-hemm'd 
  Manhatta,


  My river and sun-set, and my scallop-edg'd waves of 
  flood-tide,


  The sea-gulls oscillating their bodies, the hay-boat in 
  the twilight, and the belated lighter; 


  Curious what Gods can exceed these that clasp me by 
  the hand, and with voices I love call me promptly 
  and loudly by my nighest name as I approach; 


  Curious what is more subtle than this which ties me 
  to the woman or man that looks in my face,


  Which fuses me into you now, and pours my meaning 
  into you.






We understand, then, do we not?

  What I promis'd without mentioning it, have you not 
  accepted?


  What the study could not teach&#8212;what the preaching 
  could not accomplish, is accomplish'd, is it not?


  What the push of reading could not start, is started 
  by me personally, is it not?




  Flow on, river! flow with the flood-tide, and ebb 
  with the ebb-tide!

Frolic on, crested and scallop-edged waves!

  Gorgeous clouds of the sun-set! drench with your 
  splendor me, or the men and women generations 
  after me; 


  Cross from shore to shore, countless crowds of pas-
  sengers!


  Stand up, tall masts of Mannahatta!&#8212;stand up, beauti-
  ful hills of Brooklyn!


  Bully for you! you proud, friendly, free Manhat-
  tanese!


  Throb, baffled and curious brain! throw out questions 
  and answers!


  Suspend here and everywhere, eternal float of solu-
  tion!

Blab, blush, lie, steal, you or I or any one after us!

  Gaze, loving and thirsting eyes, in the house, or street,
  or public assembly!


  Sound out, voices of young men! loudly and musically 
  call me by my nighest name!


  Live, old life! play the part that looks back on the 
  actor or actress!


  Play the old role, the role that is great or small,
  according as one makes it!


  Consider, you who peruse me, whether I may not in 
  unknown ways be looking upon you; 


  Be firm, rail over the river, to support those who lean 
  idly, yet haste with the hasting current; 


  Fly on, sea-birds! fly sideways, or wheel in large cir-
  cles high in the air; 





  Receive the summer sky, you water! and faithfully 
  hold it, till all downcast eyes have time to take 
  it from you; 


  Diverge, fine spokes of light, from the shape of my 
  head, or any one's head, in the sun-lit water; 


  Come on, ships from the lower bay! pass up or down,
  white-sail'd schooners, sloops, lighters!


  Flaunt away, flags of all nations! be duly lower'd at 
  sunset; 


  Burn high your fires, foundry chimneys! cast black 
  shadows at nightfall! cast red and yellow light 
  over the tops of the houses; 


  Appearances, now or henceforth, indicate what you 
  are; 

You necessary film, continue to envelop the soul;

  About my body for me, and your body for you, be 
  hung our divinest aromas; 


  Thrive, cities! bring your freight, bring your shows,
  ample and sufficient rivers; 


  Expand, being than which none else is perhaps more 
  spiritual; 


  Keep your places, objects than which none else is more 
  lasting.




  We descend upon you and all things&#8212;we arrest you 
  all; 


  We realize the soul only by you, you faithful solids 
  and fluids; 

Through you color, form, location, sublimity, ideality;

  Through you every proof, comparison, and all the sug-
  gestions and determinations of ourselves.




  You have waited, you always wait, you dumb, beau- 
  tiful ministers! you novices!


  We receive you with free sense at last, and are insati-
  ate henceforward; 


  Not you any more shall be able to foil us, or with-
  hold yourselves from us; 





  We use you, and do not cast you aside&#8212;we plant you 
  permanently within us; 


  We fathom you not&#8212;we love you&#8212;there is perfection 
  in you also; 

You furnish your parts toward eternity;

  Great or small, you furnish your parts toward the 
  soul.





TO A FOIL'D REVOLTER OR REVOLTRESS.


COURAGE! my brother or my sister!
Keep on! Liberty is to be subserved, whatever occurs;

  That is nothing, that is quell'd by one or two failures,
  or any number of failures,


  Or by the indifference or ingratitude of the people, or 
  by any unfaithfulness,


  Or the show of the tushes of power, soldiers, cannon,
  penal statutes.




  What we believe in waits latent forever through all 
  the continents, and all the islands and archi-
  pelagos of the sea.




  What we believe in invites no one, promises nothing,
  sits in calmness and light, is positive and com-
  posed, knows no discouragement,

Waiting patiently, waiting its time.



  The battle rages with many a loud alarm, and fre-
  quent advance and retreat,

The infidel triumphs&#8212;or supposes he triumphs,

  The prison, scaffold, garrote, hand-cuffs, iron necklace 
  and anklet, lead-balls, do their work,

The named and unnamed heroes pass to other spheres,

  The great speakers and writers are exiled&#8212;they lie sick 
  in distant lands,





  The cause is asleep&#8212;the strongest throats are still,
  choked with their own blood,


  The young men drop their eyelashes toward the ground 
  when they meet; 


  But for all this, liberty has not gone out of the place,
  nor the infidel enter'd into possession.




  When liberty goes out of a place, it is not the first 
  to go, nor the second or third to go,

It waits for all the rest to go&#8212;it is the last.



  When there are no more memories of heroes and 
  martyrs,


  And when all life, and all the souls of men and women 
  are discharged from any part of the earth,


  Then only shall liberty be discharged from that part of 
  the earth,

And the infidel and the tyrant come into possession.


Then courage! revolter! revoltress!
For till all ceases, neither must you cease.



  I do not know what you are for, (I do not know what 
  I am for myself, nor what anything is for,)

But I will search carefully for it even in being foil'd,

  In defeat, poverty, imprisonment&#8212;for they too are 
  great.



Did we think victory great?

  So it is&#8212;But now it seems to me, when it cannot be 
  help'd, that defeat is great,

And that death and dismay are great.








TO GET BETIMES IN BOSTON TOWN.


  To get betimes in Boston town, I rose this morning 
  early; 


  Here's a good place at the corner&#8212;I must stand and 
  see the show.



Clear the way there, Jonathan!

  Way for the President's marshal! Way for the gov-
  ernment cannon!


  Way for the Federal foot and dragoons&#8212;and the appa-
  ritions copiously tumbling.




  I love to look on the stars and stripes&#8212;I hope the fifes 
  will play Yankee Doodle.




  How bright shine the cutlasses of the foremost 
  troops!


  Every man holds his revolver, marching stiff through 
  Boston town.



A fog follows&#8212;antiques of the same come limping,

  Some appear wooden-legged, and some appear ban-
  daged and bloodless.




  Why this is indeed a show! It has call'd the dead 
  out of the earth!

The old grave-yards of the hills have hurried to see!
Phantoms! phantoms countless by flank and rear!
Cock'd hats of mothy mould! crutches made of mist!

  Arms in slings! old men leaning on young men's 
  shoulders!




  What troubles you, Yankee phantoms? What is all 
  this chattering of bare gums?


  Does the ague convulse your limbs? Do you mistake 
  your crutches for fire-locks, and level them?







  If you blind your eyes with tears, you will not see 
  the President's marshal; 


  If you groan such groans you might balk the govern-
  ment cannon.




  For shame, old maniacs! Bring down those toss'd 
  arms, and let your white hair be; 


  Here gape your great grand-sons&#8212;their wives gaze at 
  them from the windows,


  See how well-dress'd&#8212;see how orderly they conduct 
  themselves.




  Worse and worse! Can't you stand it? Are you 
  retreating?

Is this hour with the living too dead for you?


Retreat then! Pell-mell!
To your graves! Back! back to the hills, old limpers!
I do not think you belong here, anyhow.



  But there is one thing that belongs here&#8212;shall I 
  tell you what it is, gentlemen of Boston?




  I will whisper it to the Mayor&#8212;he shall send a 
  committee to England; 


  They shall get a grant from the Parliament, go with a 
  cart to the royal vault&#8212;haste!


  Dig out King George's coffin, unwrap him quick from 
  the grave-clothes, box up his bones for a 
  journey; 


  Find a swift Yankee clipper&#8212;here is freight for you,
  black-bellied clipper,


  Up with your anchor! shake out your sails! steer 
  straight toward Boston bay.




  Now call for the President's marshal again, bring 
  out the government cannon,


  Fetch home the roarers from Congress, make another 
  procession, guard it with foot and dragoons.






This centre-piece for them:

  Look! all orderly citizens&#8212;look from the windows,
  women!




  The committee open the box, set up the regal ribs,
  glue those that will not stay,


  Clap the skull on top of the ribs, and clap a crown on 
  top of the skull.




  You have got your revenge, old buster! The crown 
  is come to its own, and more than its own.




  Stick your hands in your pockets, Jonathan&#8212;you 
  are a made man from this day; 


  You are mighty cute&#8212;and here is one of your 
  bargains.





TO A COMMON PROSTITUTE.


  Be composed&#8212;be at ease with me&#8212;I am Walt 
  Whitman, liberal and lusty as Nature; 

Not till the sun excludes you, do I exclude you;

  Not till the waters refuse to glisten for you, and the 
  leaves to rustle for you, do my words refuse to 
  glisten and rustle for you.




  My girl, I appoint with you an appointment&#8212;and I 
  charge you that you make preparation to be 
  worthy to meet me,


  And I charge you that you be patient and perfect till 
  I come.




  Till then, I salute you with a significant look, that 
  you do not forget me.








TO A PUPIL.

Is reform needed? Is it through you?

  The greater the reform needed, the greater PER-
  SONALITY you need to accomplish it.




  You! do you not see how it would serve to have 
  eyes, blood, complexion, clean and sweet?


  Do you not see how it would serve to have such a Body 
  and Soul, that when you enter the crowd, an 
  atmosphere of desire and command enters with 
  you, and every one is impress'd with your per-
  sonality?



O the magnet! the flesh over and over!

  Go, dear friend! if need be, give up all else, and com-
  mence to-day to inure yourself to pluck, reality,
  self-esteem, definiteness, elevatedness; 


  Rest not, till you rivet and publish yourself of your 
  own personality.





TO RICH GIVERS.

WHAT you give me, I cheerfully accept,

  A little sustenance, a hut and garden, a little money&#8212; 
  these, as I rendezvous with my poems,


  A traveler's lodging and breakfast as I journey through 
  The States&#8212;Why should I be ashamed to own 
  such gifts? Why to advertise for them?


  For I myself am not one who bestows nothing upon 
  man and woman; 


  For I bestow upon any man or woman the entrance to 
  all the gifts of the universe.







A WORD OUT OF THE SEA.

1

OUT of the rock'd cradle,
Out of the mocking-bird's throat, the musical shuttle,
Out of the Ninth-month midnight,

  Over the sterile sands, and the fields beyond, where 
  the child, leaving his bed, wander'd alone, bare-
  headed, barefoot,

Down from the shower'd halo,

  Up from the mystic play of shadows, twining and 
  twisting as if they were alive,

Out from the patches of briers and blackberries,
From the memories of the bird that chanted to me,

  From your memories, sad brother&#8212;from the fitful 
  risings and fallings I heard,


  From under that yellow half-moon, late-risen, and 
  swollen as if with tears,


  From those beginning notes of sickness and love,
  there in the transparent mist,

From the thousand responses of my heart, never to cease,
From the myriad thence-arous'd words,
From the word stronger and more delicious than any,
From such, as now they start, the scene revisiting,
As a flock, twittering, rising, or overhead passing,
Borne hither&#8212;ere all eludes me, hurriedly,
A man&#8212;yet by these tears a little boy again,
Throwing myself on the sand, confronting the waves,
I, chanter of pains and joys, uniter of here and hereafter,

  Taking all hints to use them&#8212;but swiftly leaping 
  beyond them,

A reminiscence sing.






2

Once, Paumanok,

  When the snows had melted, and the Fifth-month 
  grass was growing,

Up this sea-shore, in some briers,
Two guests from Alabama&#8212;two together,

  And their nest, and four light-green eggs, spotted with 
  brown,

And every day the he-bird, to and fro, near at hand,

  And every day the she-bird, crouch'd on her nest,
  silent, with bright eyes,


  And every day I, a curious boy, never too close, never 
  disturbing them,

Cautiously peering, absorbing, translating.



3

Shine! shine! shine!
Pour down your warmth, great Sun!
While we bask&#8212;we two together.


Two together!
Winds blow South, or winds blow North,
Day come white, or night come black,
Home, or rivers and mountains from home,
Singing all time, minding no time,
If we two but keep together.



4

Till of a sudden,
May-be kill'd, unknown to her mate,
One forenoon the she-bird crouch'd not on the nest,
Nor return'd that afternoon, nor the next,
Nor ever appear'd again.



  And thenceforward, all summer, in the sound of the 
  sea,


  And at night, under the full of the moon, in calmer 
  weather,




Over the hoarse surging of the sea,
Or flitting from brier to brier by day,

  I saw, I heard at intervals, the remaining one, the 
  he-bird,

The solitary guest from Alabama.



5

Blow! blow! blow!
Blow up, sea-winds, along Paumanok's shore!
I wait and I wait, till you blow my mate to me.



6

Yes, when the stars glisten'd,
All night long, on the prong of a moss-scallop'd stake,
Down, almost amid the slapping waves,
Sat the lone singer, wonderful, causing tears.


He call'd on his mate;

  He pour'd forth the meanings which I, of all men,
  know.



Yes, my brother, I know;

  The rest might not&#8212;but I have treasur'd every 
  note; 


  For once, and more than once, dimly, down to the 
  beach gliding,


  Silent, avoiding the moonbeams, blending myself with 
  the shadows,


  Recalling now the obscure shapes, the echoes, the 
  sounds and sights after their sorts,

The white arms out in the breakers tirelessly tossing,
I, with bare feet, a child, the wind wafting my hair,
Listen'd long and long.



  Listen'd, to keep, to sing&#8212;now translating the 
  notes,

Following you, my brother.






7

Soothe! soothe! soothe!
Close on its wave soothes the wave behind,

  And again another behind, embracing and lapping, 
  every one close,

But my love soothes not me, not me.


Low hangs the moon&#8212;it rose late;

  O it is lagging&#8212;O I think it is heavy with love, 
  with love.



O madly the sea pushes, pushes upon the land.
With love&#8212;with love.



  O night! do I not see my love fluttering out there 
  among the breakers? 

What is that little black thing I see there in the white?


Loud! loud! loud!
Loud I call to you, my love!
High and clear I shoot my voice over the waves;
Surely you must know who is here, is here;
You must know who I am, my love.


Low-hanging moon!
What is that dusky spot in your brown yellow?
O it is the shape, the shape of my mate!
O moon, do not keep her from me any longer.


Land! land! O land!

  Whichever way I turn, O I think you could give me 
  my mate back again, if you only would; 


  For I am almost sure I see her dimly whichever way 
  I look.



O rising stars!

  Perhaps the one I want so much will rise, will rise 
  with some of you.






O throat! O trembling throat!
Sound clearer through the atmosphere!
Pierce the woods, the earth;

  Somewhere listening to catch you, must be the one I 
  want.



Shake out, carols!
Solitary here&#8212;the night's carols!
Carols of lonesome love! Death's carols!
Carols under that lagging, yellow, waning moon!

  O, under that moon, where she droops almost down 
  into the sea! 

O reckless, despairing carols.


But soft! sink low;
Soft! let me just murmur;
And do you wait a moment, you husky-noised sea;

  For somewhere I believe I heard my mate responding 
  to me, 

So faint&#8212;I must be still, be still to listen;

  But not altogether still, for then she might not come 
  immediately tome.



Hither, my love!
Here I am! Here!

  With this just-sustain'd note I announce myself to 
  you; 

This gentle call is for you, my love, for you.


Do not be decoy'd elsewhere!
That is the whistle of the wind&#8212;it is not my voice;
That is the fluttering, the fluttering of the spray;
Those are the shadows of leaves.


O darkness! O in vain!
O I am very sick and sorrowful.






  O brown halo in the sky, near the moon, drooping 
  upon the sea! 

O troubled reflection in the sea!
O throat! O throbbing heart!
O all&#8212;and I singing uselessly, uselessly all the night.


Yet I murmur, murmur on!

  O murmurs&#8212;you yourselves make me continue to sing, 
  I know not why.



O past! O life! O songs of joy!
In the air&#8212;in the woods&#8212;over fields;
Loved! loved! loved! loved! loved!
But my love no more, no more with me!
We two together no more.



8

The aria sinking;
All else continuing&#8212;the stars shining,

  The winds blowing&#8212;the notes of the bird continuous 
  echoing,


  With angry moans the fierce old mother incessantly 
  moaning,

On the sands of Paumanok's shore, gray and rustling;

  The yellow half-moon enlarged, sagging down, droop-
  ing, the face of the sea almost touching; 


  The boy extatic&#8212;with his bare feet the waves, with 
  his hair the atmosphere dallying,


  The love in the heart long pent, now loose, now at last 
  tumultuously bursting,


  The aria's meaning, the ears, the Soul, swiftly deposit-
  ing,

The strange tears down the cheeks coursing,
The colloquy there&#8212;the trio&#8212;each uttering,

  The undertone&#8212;the savage old mother, incessantly 
  crying,


  To the boy's Soul's questions sullenly timing&#8212;some 
  drown'd secret hissing,

To the outsetting bard of love.






9

Demon or bird! (said the boy's soul,)

  Is it indeed toward your mate you sing? or is it 
  mostly to me?

For I, that was a child, my tongue's use sleeping,
Now I have heard you,
Now in a moment I know what I am for&#8212;I awake,

  And already a thousand singers&#8212;a thousand songs,
  clearer, louder and more sorrowful than yours,


  A thousand warbling echoes have started to life within 
  me,

Never to die.



  O you singer, solitary, singing by yourself&#8212;project-
  ing me; 


  O solitary me, listening&#8212;never more shall I cease per-
  petuating you; 


  Never more shall I escape, never more the reverbera-
  tions,


  Never more the cries of unsatisfied love be absent 
  from me,


  Never again leave me to be the peaceful child I was 
  before what there, in the night,

By the sea, under the yellow and sagging moon,

  The messenger there aroused&#8212;the fire, the sweet hell 
  within,

The unknown want, the destiny of me.



  O give me the clew! (it lurks in the night here 
  somewhere;)

O if I am to have so much, let me have more!

  O a word! O what is my destination? (I fear it is 
  henceforth chaos;)


  O how joys, dreads, convolutions, human shapes, and 
  all shapes, spring as from graves around me!

O phantoms! you cover all the land and all the sea!

  O I cannot see in the dimness whether you smile or 
  frown upon me; 




O vapor, a look, a word! O well-beloved!
O you dear women's and men's phantoms!


A word then, (for I will conquer it,)
The word final, superior to all,
Subtle, sent up&#8212;what is it?&#8212;I listen;

  Are you whispering it, and have been all the time, you 
  sea-waves?

Is that it from your liquid rims and wet sands?



10

Whereto answering, the sea,
Delaying not, hurrying not,

  Whisper'd me through the night, and very plainly be-
  fore daybreak,

Lisp'd to me the low and delicious word DEATH;
And again Death&#8212;ever Death, Death, Death,

  Hissing melodious, neither like the bird, nor like my 
  arous'd child's heart,


  But edging near, as privately for me, rustling at my 
  feet,


  Creeping thence steadily up to my ears, and laving me 
  softly all over,

Death, Death, Death, Death, Death.


Which I do not forget,
But fuse the song of my dusky demon and brother,

  That he sang to me in the moonlight on Paumanok's 
  gray beach,

With the thousand responsive songs, at random,
My own songs, awaked from that hour;
And with them the key, the word up from the waves,
The word of the sweetest song, and all songs,

  That strong and delicious word which, creeping to my 
  feet,

The sea whisper'd me.








A LEAF OF FACES.

1

              SAUNTERING the pavement, or riding the country by-
  road&#8212;lo! such faces!


  Faces of friendship, precision, caution, suavity,
  ideality; 


  The spiritual prescient face&#8212;the always welcome,
  common, benevolent face,


  The face of the singing of music&#8212;the grand faces of 
  natural lawyers and judges, broad at the back-
  top; 


  The faces of hunters and fishers, bulged at the brows&#8212; 
  the shaved blanch'd faces of orthodox citizens; 


  The pure, extravagant, yearning, questioning artist's 
  face; 


  The ugly face of some beautiful Soul, the handsome 
  detested or despised face; 


  The sacred faces of infants, the illuminated face of the 
  mother of many children; 

The face of an amour, the face of veneration;
The face as of a dream, the face of an immobile rock;

  The face withdrawn of its good and bad, a castrated 
  face; 

A wild hawk, his wings clipp'd by the clipper;

  A stallion that yielded at last to the thongs and knife 
  of the gelder.




  Sauntering the pavement, thus, or crossing the 
  ceaseless ferry, faces, and faces, and faces: 


  I see them, and complain not, and am content with 
  all.







2


  Do you suppose I could be content with all, if I 
  thought them their own finale?



This now is too lamentable a face for a man;
Some abject louse, asking leave to be&#8212;cringing for it;

  Some milk-nosed maggot, blessing what lets it wrig to 
  its hole.



This face is a dog's snout, sniffing for garbage;
Snakes nest in that mouth&#8212;I hear the sibilant threat.


This face is a haze more chill than the arctic sea;
Its sleepy and wobbling icebergs crunch as they go.



  This is a face of bitter herbs&#8212;this an emetic&#8212;they 
  need no label; 


  And more of the drug-shelf, laudanum, caoutchouc, or 
  hog's-lard.




  This face is an epilepsy, its wordless tongue gives 
  out the unearthly cry,


  Its veins down the neck distend, its eyes roll till 
  they show nothing but their whites,


  Its teeth grit, the palms of the hands are cut by the 
  turn'd-in nails,


  The man falls struggling and foaming to the ground 
  while he speculates well.



This face is bitten by vermin and worms,

  And this is some murderer's knife with a half-pull'd 
  scabbard.



This face owes to the sexton his dismalest fee;
An unceasing death-bell tolls there.






3


  Those then are really men&#8212;the bosses and tufts of 
  the great round globe!




  Features of my equals, would you trick me with 
  your creas'd and cadaverous march?

Well, you cannot trick me.


I see your rounded never-erased flow;

  I see neath the rims of your haggard and mean dis-
  guises.




  Splay and twist as you like&#8212;poke with the tangling 
  fores of fishes or rats; 

You'll be unmuzzled, you certainly will.



  I saw the face of the most smear'd and slobbering 
  idiot they had at the asylum; 

And I knew for my consolation what they knew not;

  I knew of the agents that emptied and broke my 
  brother,


  The same wait to clear the rubbish from the fallen 
  tenement; 

And I shall look again in a score or two of ages,

  And I shall meet the real landlord, perfect and un-
  harm'd, every inch as good as myself.




4

The Lord advances, and yet advances;

  Always the shadow in front&#8212;always the reach'd hand 
  bringing up the laggards.




  Out of this face emerge banners and horses&#8212;O su-
  perb! I see what is coming; 


  I see the high pioneer-caps&#8212;I see the staves of run-
  ners clearing the way,

I hear victorious drums.





This face is a life-boat;

  This is the face commanding and bearded, it asks no 
  odds of the rest; 

This face is flavor'd fruit, ready for eating;

  This face of a healthy honest boy is the programme of 
  all good.



These faces bear testimony slumbering or awake;
They show their descent from the Master himself.



  Off the word I have spoken I except not one&#8212;red,
  white, black, are all deific; 


  In each house is the ovum&#8212;it comes forth after a 
  thousand years.



Spots or cracks at the windows do not disturb me;

  Tall and sufficient stand behind, and make signs to 
  me; 

I read the promise, and patiently
wait.


This is a full-grown lily's face,

  She speaks to the limber-hipp'd man near the garden 
  pickets,


  Come here, she blushingly cries&#8212;Come nigh to me, lim- 
  ber-hipp'd man, 

Stand at my side till I lean as high as I can upon you,
Fill me with albescent honey, bend down to me,

  Rub to me with your chafing beard, rub to my breast and 
  shoulders.




5

The old face of the mother of many children!
Whist! I am fully content.



  Lull'd and late is the smoke of the First-day 
  morning,

It hangs low over the rows of trees by the fences,

  It hangs thin by the sassafras, the wild-cherry, and 
  the cat-brier under them.






I saw the rich ladies in full dress at the soiree,
I heard what the singers were singing so long,

  Heard who sprang in crimson youth from the white 
  froth and the water-blue.



Behold a woman!

  She looks out from her quaker cap&#8212;her face is clearer 
  and more beautiful than the sky.




  She sits in an arm-chair, under the shaded porch of 
  the farm-house,

The sun just shines on her old white head.


Her ample gown is of cream-hued linen,

  Her grandsons raised the flax, and her grand-daugh-
  ters spun it with the distaff and the wheel.



The melodious character of the earth,

  The finish beyond which philosophy cannot go, and 
  does not wish to go,

The justified mother of men.





STRONGER LESSONS.

  HAVE you learned lessons only of those who admired 
  you, and were tender with you, and stood aside 
  for you?


  Have you not learned the great lessons of those who 
  rejected you, and braced themselves against 
  you? or who treated you with contempt, or 
  disputed the passage with you?







EUROPE, The 72d and 73d Years of These States.


  SUDDENLY, out of its stale and drowsy lair, the lair 
  of slaves,

Like lightning it le'pt forth, half startled at itself,

  Its feet upon the ashes and the rags&#8212;its hands tight 
  to the throats of kings.



O hope and faith!
O aching close of exiled patriots' lives!
O many a sicken'd heart!
Turn back unto this day, and make yourselves afresh.



  And you, paid to defile the People! you liars,
  mark!

Not for numberless agonies, murders, lusts,

  For court thieving in its manifold mean forms, worm-
  ing from his simplicity the poor man's wages,


  For many a promise sworn by royal lips, and broken,
  and laugh'd at in the breaking,


  Then in their power, not for all these did the blow.
  strike revenge, or the heads of the nobles fall; 

The People scorn'd the ferocity of kings.



  But the sweetness of mercy brew'd bitter destruc-
  tion, and the frighten'd rulers come back; 


  Each comes in state with his train&#8212;hangman, priest,
  tax-gatherer,

Soldier, lawyer, lord, jailer, and sycophant.


Yet behind all, lowering, stealing&#8212;lo, a Shape,

  Vague as the night, draped interminably, head, front 
  and form, in scarlet folds,

Whose face and eyes none may see,

  Out of its robes only this&#8212;the red robes, lifted by the 
  arm,





  One finger, crook'd, pointed high over the top, like 
  the head of a snake appears.




  Meanwhile, corpses lie in new-made graves&#8212;bloody 
  corpses of young men; 


  The rope of the gibbet hangs heavily, the bullets of 
  princes are flying, the creatures of power laugh 
  aloud,

And all these things bear fruits&#8212;and they are good.


Those corpses of young men,

  Those martyrs that hang from the gibbets&#8212;those 
  hearts pierc'd by the gray lead,


  Cold and motionless as they seem, live elsewhere with 
  unslaughter'd vitality.



They live in other youngmen, O kings!
They live in brothers, again ready to defy you!

  They were purified by death&#8212;they were taught and 
  exalted.




  Not a grave of the murder'd for freedom, but grows 
  seed for freedom, in its turn to bear seed,


  Which the winds carry afar and re-sow, and the rains 
  and the snows nourish.




  Not a disembodied spirit can the weapons of tyrants 
  let loose,


  But it stalks invisibly over the earth, whispering,
  counseling, cautioning.




  Liberty! let others despair of you! I never despair 
  of you.



Is the house shut? Is the master away?
Nevertheless, be ready&#8212;be not weary of watching;
He will soon return&#8212;his messengers come anon.







THOUGHT.

OF Public Opinion;

  Of a calm and cool fiat, sooner or later, (How im-
  passive! How certain and final!)


  Of the President with pale face asking secretly to 
  himself, What will the people say at last? 


  Of the frivolous Judge&#8212;Of the corrupt Congressman,
  Governor, Mayor&#8212;Of such as these, standing 
  helpless and exposed; 


  Of the mumbling and screaming priest&#8212;(soon, soon 
  deserted;)


  Of the lessening, year by year, of venerableness, and 
  of the dicta of officers, statutes, pulpits, schools; 


  Of the rising forever taller and stronger and broader,
  of the intuitions of men and women, and of 
  self-esteem, and of personality; 


  &#8212;Of the New World&#8212;Of the Democracies, resplendent,
  en-masse; 


  Of the conformity of politics, armies, navies, to them 
  and to me,


  Of the shining sun by them&#8212;Of the inherent light,
  greater than the rest,


  Of the envelopment of all by them, and of the effusion 
  of all from them.




THE RUNNER.

ON a flat road runs the well-train'd runner;
He is lean and sinewy, with muscular legs;
He is thinly clothed&#8212;he leans forward as he runs,
With lightly closed fists, and arms partially rais'd.






TO THE SAYERS OF WORDS.

1

 EARTH, round, rolling, compact&#8212;suns, moons, ani-
  mals&#8212;all these are words to be said; 


  Watery, vegetable, sauroid advances&#8212;beings, premoni-
  tions, lispings of the future,

Behold! these are vast words to be said.



  Were you thinking that those were the words&#8212; 
  those upright lines? those curves, angles, dots?


  No, those are not the words&#8212;the substantial words 
  are in the ground and sea,

They are in the air&#8212;they are in you.



  Were you thinking that those were the words&#8212; 
  those delicious sounds out of your friends' 
  mouths?

No, the real words are more delicious than they.


Human bodies are words, myriads of words;

  In the best poems re-appears the body, man's or wo-
  man's, well-shaped, natural, gay,


  Every part able, active, receptive, without shame or 
  the need of shame.



Air, soil, water, fire&#8212;these are words;

  I myself am a word with them&#8212;my qualities inter-
  penetrate with theirs&#8212;my name is nothing to 
  them; 


  Though it were told in the three thousand languages,
  what would air, soil, water, fire, know of my 
  name?







  A healthy presence, a friendly or commanding ges-
  ture, are words, sayings, meanings; 


  The charms that go with the mere looks of some men 
  and women, are sayings and meanings also.




2


  The workmanship of souls is by the inaudible words 
  of the earth; 


  The great masters know the earth's words, and use 
  them more than the audible words.



Amelioration is one of the earth's words;
The earth neither lags nor hastens;

  It has all attributes, growths, effects, latent in itself 
  from the jump; 


  It is not half beautiful only&#8212;defects and excrescences 
  show just as much as perfections show.



The earth does not withhold, it is generous enough;

  The truths of the earth continually wait, they are not 
  so conceal'd either; 

They are calm, subtle, untransmissible by print;

  They are imbued through all things, conveying them-
  selves willingly,


  Conveying a sentiment and invitation of the earth&#8212;I 
  utter and utter,


  I speak not, yet if you hear me not, of what avail am 
  I to you?


  To bear&#8212;to better&#8212;lacking these, of what avail 
  am I?



(Accouche! Accouchez!
Will you rot your own fruit in yourself there?
Will you squat and stifle there?)


The earth does not argue,
Is not pathetic, has no arrangements,
Does not scream, haste, persuade, threaten, promise,



Makes no discriminations, has no conceivable failures,
Closes nothing, refuses nothing, shuts none out,

  Of all the powers, objects, states, it notifies, shuts 
  none out.




  The earth does not exhibit itself, nor refuse to ex-
  hibit itself&#8212;possesses still underneath; 


  Underneath the ostensible sounds, the august chorus 
  of heroes, the wail of slaves,


  Persuasions of lovers, curses, gasps of the dying,
  laughter of young people, accents of bar-
  gainers,


  Underneath these, possessing the words that never 
  fail.




  To her children, the words of the eloquent dumb 
  great mother never fail; 


  The true words do not fail, for motion does not fail,
  and reflection does not fail; 


  Also the day and night do not fail, and the voyage we 
  pursue does not fail.




3

Of the interminable sisters,
Of the ceaseless cotillions of sisters,

  Of the centripetal and centrifugal sisters, the elder 
  and younger sisters,

The beautiful sister we know dances on with the rest.


With her ample back towards every beholder,

  With the fascinations of youth, and the equal fascina-
  tions of age,


  Sits she whom I too love like the rest&#8212;sits undis-
  turb'd,


  Holding up in her hand what has the character of a 
  mirror, while her eyes glance back from it,

Glance as she sits, inviting none, denying none,

  Holding a mirror day and night tirelessly before her 
  own face.






Seen at hand, or seen at a distance,
Duly the twenty-four appear in public every day,

  Duly approach and pass with their companions, or a 
  companion,


  Looking from no countenances of their own, but from 
  the countenances of those who are with them,


  From the countenances of children or women, or the 
  manly countenance,


  From the open countenances of animals, or from in-
  animate things,


  From the landscape or waters, or from the exquisite 
  apparition of the sky,


  From our countenances, mine and yours, faithfully re-
  turning them,


  Every day in public appearing without fail, but never 
  twice with the same companions.




  Embracing man, embracing all, proceed the three 
  hundred and sixty-five resistlessly round the 
  sun; 


  Embracing all, soothing, supporting, follow close three 
  hundred and sixty-five offsets of the first, sure 
  and necessary as they.



Tumbling on steadily, nothing dreading,

  Sunshine, storm, cold, heat, forever withstanding.
  passing, carrying,


  The Soul's realization and determination still inherit-
  ing; 


  The fluid vacuum around and ahead still entering and 
  dividing,


  No balk retarding, no anchor anchoring, on no rock 
  striking,

Swift, glad, content, unbereav'd, nothing losing,

  Of all able and ready at any time to give strict ac-
  count,

The divine ship sails the divine sea.






4


  Whoever you are! motion and reflection are especi-
  ally for you; 

The divine ship sails the divine sea for you.



  Whoever you are! you are he or she for whom the 
  earth is solid and liquid,


  You are he or she for whom the sun and moon hang 
  in the sky,

For none more than you are the present and the past,
For none more than you is immortality.



  Each man to himself, and each woman to herself,
  such is the word of the past and present, and 
  the word of immortality; 

No one can acquire for another&#8212;not one!
Not one can grow for another&#8212;not one!



  The song is to the singer, and comes back most to 
  him; 


  The teaching is to the teacher, and comes back most 
  to him; 


  The murder is to the murderer, and comes back most 
  to him; 

The theft is to the thief, and comes back most to him;
The love is to the lover, and comes back most to him;

  The gift is to the giver, and comes back most to him    
  &#8212;it cannot fail; 


  The oration is to the orator, the acting is to the actor 
  and actress, not to the audience; 


  And no man understands any greatness or goodness 
  but his own, or the indication of his own.




5


  I swear the earth shall surely be complete to him or 
  her who shall be complete!


  I swear the earth remains jagged and broken only to 
  him or her who remains broken and jagged!







  I swear there is no greatness or power that does 
  not emulate those of the earth!


  I swear there can be no theory of any account, unless 
  it corroborate the theory of the earth!


  No politics, art, religion, behavior, or what not, is of 
  account, unless it compare with the amplitude 
  of the earth,


  Unless it face the exactness; vitality, impartiality, rec-
  titude of the earth.




  I swear I begin to see love with sweeter spasms than 
  that which responds love!


  It is that which contains itself&#8212;which never invites,
  and never refuses.




  I swear I begin to see little or nothing in audible 
  words!


  I swear I think all merges toward the presentation of 
  the unspoken meanings of the earth!


  Toward him who sings the songs of the Body, and of 
  the truths of the earth; 


  Toward him who makes the dictionaries of words that 
  print cannot touch.



I swear I see what is better than to tell the best;
It is always to leave the best untold.


When I undertake to tell the best, I find I cannot,
My tongue is ineffectual on its pivots,
My breath will not be obedient to its organs,
I become a dumb man.



  The best of the earth cannot be told anyhow&#8212;all 
  or any is best; 


  It is not what you anticipated&#8212;it is cheaper, easier 
  nearer; 


  Things are not dismiss'd from the places they held 
  before; 





   The earth is just as positive and direct as it was be-
  fore; 


  Facts, religions, improvements, politics, trades, are as 
  real as before; 


  But the Soul is also real,&#8212;it too is positive and 
  direct; 

No reasoning, no proof has establish'd it,
Undeniable proof has establish'd it.



6


  This is a poem for the sayers of words&#8212;these are 
  hints of meanings,


  These are they that echo the tones of Souls, and 
  the phrases of Souls; 


  If they did not echo the phrases of Souls, what were 
  they then ?


  If they had not reference to you in especial, what were 
  they then?




  I swear I will never henceforth have to do with the 
  faith that tells the best!


  I will have to do only with that faith that leaves the 
  best untold.




7

Say on, sayers!
Delve! mould! pile the words of the earth!
Work on&#8212;it is materials you bring, not breaths;
Work on, age after age! nothing is to be lost;

  It may have to wait long, but it will certainly come in 
  use; 


  When the materials are all prepared, the architects 
  shall appear.




  I swear to you the architects shall appear without 
  fail! I announce them and lead them; 


  I swear to you they will understand you and justify 
  you; 





  I swear to you the greatest among them shall be he 
  who best knows you, and encloses all, and is 
  faithful to all; 


  I swear to you, he and the rest shall not forget you&#8212; 
  they shall perceive that you are not an iota less 
  than they; 

I swear to you, you shall be glorified in them.





LONGINGS FOR HOME.

  O MAGNET-SOUTH! O glistening, perfumed South! My 
  South!


  O quick mettle, rich blood, impulse, and love! Good 
  and evil! O all dear to me!


  O dear to me my birth-things&#8212;All moving things,
  and the trees where I was born&#8212;the grains,
  plants, rivers; 


  Dear to me my own slow sluggish rivers where they 
  flow, distant, over flats of silvery sands, or 
  through swamps; 


  Dear to me the Roanoke, the Savannah, the Altama-
  haw, the Pedee, the Tombigbee, the Santee, the 
  Coosa, and the Sabine; 


  O pensive, far away wandering, I return with my Soul 
  to haunt their banks again; 


  Again in Florida I float on transparent lakes&#8212;I float 
  on the Okeechobee&#8212;I cross the hummock land,
  or through pleasant openings, or dense forests; 


  I see the parrots in the woods&#8212;I see the papaw tree 
  and the blossoming titi; 


  Again, sailing in my coaster, on deck, I coast off 
  Georgia&#8212;I coast up the Carolinas,


  I see where the live-oak is growing&#8212;I see where the 
  yellow-pine, the scented bay-tree, the lemon and 
  orange, the cypress, the graceful palmetto; 





   I pass rude sea-headlands and enter Pamlico Sound 
  through an inlet, and dart my vision inland; 


  O the cotton plant! the growing fields of rice, sugar,
  hemp!


  The cactus, guarded with thorns&#8212;the laurel-tree,
  with large white flowers; 


  The range afar&#8212;the richness and barrenness&#8212;the old 
  woods charged with mistletoe and trailing moss,


  The piney odor and the gloom&#8212;the awful natural 
  stillness, (Here in these dense swamps the free-
  booter carries his gun, and the fugitive slave 
  has his conceal'd hut;)


  O the strange fascination of these half-known, half-
  impassable swamps, infested by reptiles, re-
  sounding with the bellow of the alligator, the 
  sad noises of the night-owl and the wild-cat,
  and the whirr of the rattlesnake; 


  The mocking-bird, the American mimic, singing all 
  the forenoon&#8212;singing through the moon-lit 
  night,


  The humming-bird, the wild-turkey, the raccoon, the 
  opossum; 


  A Tennessee corn-field&#8212;the tall, graceful, long-leav'd 
  corn&#8212;slender, flapping, bright green, with 
  tassels&#8212;with beautiful ears, each well-sheath'd 
  in its husk; 

An Arkansas prairie&#8212;a sleeping lake, or still bayou;

  O my heart! O tender and fierce pangs&#8212;I can stand 
  them not&#8212;I will depart; 


  O to be a Virginian, where I grew up! O to be a 
  Carolinian!


  O longings irrepressible! O I will go back to old Ten-
  nessee, and never wander more!







TO A PRESIDENT.

  ALL you are doing and saying is to America dangled 
  mirages; 


  You have not learn'd of Nature&#8212;of the politics of 
  Nature, you have not learn'd the great ampli-
  tude, rectitude, impartiality; 


  You have not seen that only such as they are for These 
  States,


  And that what is less than they, must sooner or later 
  lift off from These States.




WALT WHITMAN'S CAUTION.

   To The States, or any one of them, or any city of The 
  States, Resist much, obey little; 

Once unquestioning obedience, once fully enslaved;

  Once fully enslaved, no nation, state, city, of this earth,
  ever afterward resumes its liberty.




TO OTHER LANDS.

  I HEAR you have been asking for something to repre-
  sent the new race, our self-poised Democracy,


  Therefore I send you my poems, that you behold in 
  them what you wanted.







SONG OF THE OPEN ROAD.

1

AFOOT and light-hearted, I take to the open road,
Healthy, free, the world before me,

  The long brown path before me, leading wherever I 
  choose.




  Henceforth I ask not good-fortune&#8212;I myself am 
  good-fortune; 


  Henceforth I whimper no more, postpone no more,
  need nothing,

Strong and content, I travel the open road.


The earth&#8212;that is sufficient;
I do not want the constellations any nearer;
I know they are very well where they are;
I know they suffice for those who belong to them.


Still here I carry my old delicious burdens;

  I carry them, men and women&#8212;I carry them with me 
  wherever I go; 

I swear it is impossible for me to get rid of them;
I am fill'd with them, and I will fill them in return.



2


  You road I enter upon and look around! I believe 
  you are not all that is here; I believe that much unseen is also here.







  Here is the profound lesson of reception, neither 
  preference or denial; 


  The black with his woolly head, the felon, the dis-
  eas'd, the illiterate person, are not denied; 


  The birth, the hasting after the physician, the beggar's 
  tramp, the drunkard's stagger, the laughing 
  party of mechanics,


  The escaped youth, the rich person's carriage, the fop,
  the eloping couple,


  The early market-man, the hearse, the moving of 
  furniture into the town, the return back from 
  the town,


  They pass, I also pass, anything passes&#8212;none can be 
  interdicted,

None but are accepted, none but are dear to me.



3

You air that serves me with breath to speak!

  You objects that call from diffusion my meanings and 
  give them shape!


  You light that wraps me and all things in delicate 
  equable showers!

You animals moving serenely over the earth!

  You birds that wing yourselves through the air! you 
  insects!


  You sprouting growths from the farmers' fields! you 
  stalks and weeds by the fences!


  You paths worn in the irregular hollows by the road-
  sides!


  I think you are latent with unseen existences&#8212;you 
  are so dear to me.




  You flagg'd walks of the cities! you strong curbs at 
  the edges!


  You ferries! you planks and posts of wharves! you 
  timber-lined sides! you distant ships!


  You rows of houses! you window-pierc'd fa&#231;ades! you 
  roofs!





  You porches and entrances! you copings and iron 
  guards!


  You windows whose transparent shells might expose so 
  much!

You doors and ascending steps! you arches!

  You gray stones of interminable pavements! you trod-
  den crossings!


  From all that has been near you, I believe you have im-
  parted to yourselves, and now would impart the 
  same secretly to me; 


  From the living and the dead I think you have peopled 
  your impassive surfaces, and the spirits thereof 
  would be evident and amicable with me.




4

The earth expanding right hand and left hand,
The picture alive, every part in its best light,

  The music falling in where it is wanted, and stopping 
  where it is not wanted,


  The cheerful voice of the public road&#8212;the gay fresh 
  sentiment of the road.




  O highway I travel! O public road! do you say to 
  me, Do not leave me?


  Do you say, Venture not? If you leave me, you are 
  lost?


  Do you say, I am already prepared&#8212;I am well-beaten 
  and undenied&#8212;adhere to me?




  O public road! I say back, I am not afraid to leave 
  you&#8212;yet I love you; 

You express me better than I can express myself;
You shall be more to me than my poem.



  I think heroic deeds were all conceiv'd in the open 
  air; 

I think I could stop here myself, and do miracles;




  I think whatever I shall meet on the road I shall like,
  and whoever beholds me shall like me; 

I think whoever I see must be happy.



5

From this hour, freedom!

  From this hour I ordain myself loosed of limits and 
  imaginary lines,


  Going where I list&#8212;my own master, total and abso-
  lute,


  Listening to others, and considering well what they 
  say,

Pausing, searching, receiving, contemplating,

  Gently, but with undeniable will, divesting myself of 
  the holds that would hold me.



I inhale great draughts of air;

  The east and the west are mine, and the north and the 
  south are mine.



I am larger than I thought;
I did not know I held so much goodness.


All seems beautiful to me;

  I can repeat over to men and women, You have done 
  such good to me, I would do the same to you.



I will recruit for myself and you as I go;
I will scatter myself among men and women as I go;

  I will toss the new gladness and roughness among 
  them; 

Whoever denies me, it shall not trouble me;

  Whoever accepts me, he or she shall be blessed, and 
  shall bless me.




6


  Now if a thousand perfect men were to appear, it 
  would not amaze me; 


  Now if a thousand beautiful forms of women appear'd,
  it would not astonish me.







  Now I see the secret of the making of the best per-
  sons,


  It is to grow in the open air, and to eat and sleep with 
  the earth.



Here is space&#8212;here a great personal deed has room;
   
  A great deed seizes upon the hearts of the whole race 
  of men,


  Its effusion of strength and will overwhelms law, and 
  mocks all authority and all argument against it.



Here is the test of wisdom;
Wisdom is not finally tested in schools;

  Wisdom cannot be pass'd from one having it, to an-
  other not having it; 


  Wisdom is of the Soul, is not susceptible of proof, is 
  its own proof,


  Applies to all stages and objects and qualities, and is 
  content,


  Is the certainty of the reality and immortality of 
  things, and the excellence of things; 


  Something there is in the float of the sight of things 
  that provokes it out of the Soul.



Now I re&#235;xamine philosophies and religions,

  They may prove well in lecture-rooms, yet not prove at 
  all under the spacious clouds, and along the land-
  scape and flowing currents.



Here is realization;

  Here is a man tallied&#8212;he realizes here what he has in 
  him; 


  The animals, the past, the future, light, space, majesty,
  love, if they are vacant of you, you are vacant 
  of them.



Only the kernel of every object nourishes;
Where is he who tears off the husks for you and me?

  Where is he that undoes stratagems and envelopes for 
  you and me?







  Here is adhesiveness&#8212;it is not previously fashion'd 
  &#8212;it is apropos; 


  Do you know what it is, as you pass, to be loved by 
  strangers?

Do you know the talk of those turning eye-balls?



7

Here is the efflux of the Soul;

  The efflux of the Soul comes from within, through em-
  bower'd gates, ever provoking questions: 


  These yearnings, why are they? These thoughts in the 
  darkness, why are they?


  Why are there men and women that while they are 
  nigh me, the sun-light expands my blood?


  Why, when they leave me, do my pennants of joy sink 
  flat and lank?


  Why are there trees I never walk under, but large and 
  melodious thoughts descend upon me?


  (I think they hang there winter and summer on those 
  trees, and always drop fruit as I pass;)

What is it I interchange so suddenly with strangers?

  What with some driver, as I ride on the seat by his 
  side?


  What with some fisherman, drawing his seine by the 
  shore, as I walk by, and pause?


  What gives me to be free to a woman's or man's good-
  will? What gives them to be free to mine?




8


  The efflux of the Soul is happiness&#8212;here is happi-
  ness; 

I think it pervades the air, waiting at all times;
Now it flows into us&#8212;we are rightly charged.


Here rises the fluid and attaching character;

  The fluid and attaching character is the freshness and 
  sweetness of man and woman; 





  (The herbs of the morning sprout no fresher and 
  sweeter every day out of the roots of them-
  selves, than it sprouts fresh and sweet contin-
  ually out of itself.)




  Toward the fluid and attaching character exudes 
  the sweat of the love of young and old; 


  From it falls distill'd the charm that mocks beauty 
  and attainments; 


  Toward it heaves the shuddering longing ache of 
  contact.




9

Allons! whoever you are, come travel with me!
Traveling with me, you find what never tires.


The earth never tires;

  The earth is rude, silent, incomprehensible at first&#8212; 
  Nature is rude and incomprehensible at first; 


  Be not discouraged&#8212;keep on&#8212;there are divine things,
  well envelop'd; 


  I swear to you there are divine things more beautiful 
  than words can tell.



Allons! We must not stop here!

  However sweet these laid-up stores&#8212;however con-
  venient this dwelling, we cannot remain here; 


  However shelter'd this port, and however calm these 
  waters, we must not anchor here; 


  However welcome the hospitality that surrounds us,
  we are permitted to receive it but a little while.




10

Allons! The inducements shall be great to you;
We will sail pathless and wild seas;

  We will go where winds blow, waves dash, and the 
  Yankee clipper speeds by under full sail.







  Allons! With power, liberty, the earth, the ele-
  ments!

Health, defiance, gayety, self-esteem, curiosity;
Allons! from all formules!

  From your formules, O bat-eyed and materialistic 
  priests!




  The stale cadaver blocks up the passage&#8212;the burial 
  waits no longer.



Allons! Yet take warning!

  He traveling with me needs the best blood, thews,
  endurance; 


  None may come to the trial, till he or she bring 
  courage and health.




  Come not here if you have already spent the best 
  of yourself; 


  Only those may come, who come in sweet and de-
  termin'd bodies; 


  No diseas'd person&#8212;no rum-drinker or venereal 
  taint is permitted here.




  I and mine do not convince by arguments, similes,
  rhymes; 

We convince by our presence.



11

Listen! I will be honest with you;

  I do not offer the old smooth prizes, but offer rough 
  new prizes; 

These are the days that must happen to you:


You shall not heap up what is call'd riches,

  You shall scatter with lavish hand all that you earn 
  or achieve,





  You but arrive at the city to which you were des-
  tined&#8212;you hardly settle yourself to satisfaction,
  before you are call'd by an irresistible call to 
  depart,


  You shall be treated to the ironical smiles and mock-
  ings of those who remain behind you; 


  What beckonings of love you receive, you shall only 
  answer with passionate kisses of parting,


  You shall not allow the hold of those who spread 
  their reach'd hands toward you.




12


  Allons! After the GREAT COMPANIONS! and to belong 
  to them!


  They too are on the road! they are the swift and 
  majestic men! they are the greatest women.




  Over that which hinder'd them&#8212;over that which 
  retarded&#8212;passing impediments large or small,


  Committers of crimes, committers of many beautiful 
  virtues,

Enjoyers of calms of seas, and storms of seas,

  Sailors of many a ship, walkers of many a mile of 
  land,


  Habitu&#233;s of many different countries, habitu&#233;s of far-
  distant dwellings,


  Trusters of men and women, observers of cities, soli-
  tary toilers,


  Pausers and contemplators of tufts, blossoms, shells 
  of the shore,


  Dancers at wedding-dances, kissers of brides, tender 
  helpers of children, bearers of children,


  Soldiers of revolts, standers by gaping graves, lower-
  ers down of coffins,


  Jouneyers over consecutive seasons, over the years&#8212; 
  the curious years, each emerging from that 
  which preceded it,





  Journeyers as with companions, namely, their own 
  diverse phases,

Forth-steppers from the latent unrealized baby-days,

  Journeyers gayly with their own youth&#8212;Journeyers 
  with their bearded and well-grain'd manhood,


  Journeyers with their womanhood, ample, unsur-
  pass'd, content,


  Journeyers with their own sublime old age of man-
  hood or womanhood,


  Old age, calm, expanded, broad with the haughty 
  breadth of the universe,


  Old age, flowing free with the delicious near-by free-
  dom of death.




13


  Allons! To that which is endless, as it was begin-
  ningless,

To undergo much, tramps of days, rests of nights,

  To merge all in the travel they tend to, and the days 
  and nights they tend to,


  Again to merge them in the start of superior jour-
  neys; 


  To see nothing anywhere but what you may reach it 
  and pass it,


  To conceive no time, however distant, but what you 
  may reach it and pass it,


  To look up or down no road but it stretches and 
  waits for you&#8212;however long, but it stretches 
  and waits for you; 


  To see no being, not God's or any, but you also go 
  thither,


  To see no possession but you may possess it&#8212;enjoy-
  ing all without labor or purchase&#8212;abstracting 
  the feast, yet not abstracting one particle of it; 


  To take the best of the farmer's farm and the rich 
  man's elegant villa, and the chaste blessings of 
  the well-married couple, and the fruits of or-
  chards and flowers of gardens,





  To take to your use out of the compact cities as you 
  pass through,


  To carry buildings and streets with you afterward 
  wherever you go,


  To gather the minds of men out of their brains as 
  you encounter them&#8212;to gather the love out of 
  their hearts,


  To take your lovers on the road with you, for all that 
  you leave them behind you,


  To know the universe itself as a road&#8212;as many roads 
  &#8212;as roads for traveling souls.




14

The soul travels;
The body does not travel as much as the soul;

  The body has just as great a work as the soul, and 
  parts away at last for the journeys of the soul.



All parts away for the progress of souls;

  All religion, all solid things, arts, governments,&#8212;all 
  that was or is apparent upon this globe or any 
  globe, falls into niches and corners before the 
  procession of Souls along the grand roads of 
  the universe.




  Of the progress of the souls of men and women 
  along the grand roads of the universe, all 
  other progress is the needed emblem and sus-
  tenance.



Forever alive, forever forward,

  Stately, solemn, sad, withdrawn, baffled, mad, turbu-
  lent, feeble, dissatisfied,


  Desperate, proud, fond, sick, accepted by men, re-
  jected by men,


  They go! they go! I know that they go, but I know 
  not where they go; 


  But I know that they go toward the best&#8212;toward 
  something great.







15

Allons! Whoever you are! come forth!

  You must not stay sleeping and dallying there in the 
  house, though you built it, or though it has 
  been built for you.



Allons! out of the dark confinement!
It is useless to protest&#8212;I know all, and expose it.


Behold, through you as bad as the rest,

  Through the laughter, dancing, dining, supping, of 
  people,


  Inside of dresses and ornaments, inside of those 
  wash'd and trimm'd faces,

Behold a secret silent loathing and despair.



  No husband, no wife, no friend, trusted to hear the 
  confession; 


  Another self, a duplicate of every one, skulking and 
  hiding it goes,


  Formless and wordless through the streets of the 
  cities, polite and bland in the parlors,


  In the cars of rail-roads, in steamboats, in the public 
  assembly,


  Home to the houses of men and women, at the table,
  in the bed-room everywhere,


  Smartly attired, countenance smiling, form upright,
  death under the breast-bones, hell under the 
  skull-bones,


  Under the broadcloth and gloves, under the ribbons 
  and artificial flowers,


  Keeping fair with the customs, speaking not a syllable 
  of itself,

Speaking of anything else, but never of itself.



16

Allons! Through struggles and wars!
The goal that was named cannot be countermanded.





Have the past struggles succeeded?

  What has succeeded? Yourself? Your nation? Na-
  ture?


  Now understand me well&#8212;It is provided in the es-
  sence of things, that from any fruition of suc-
  cess, no matter what, shall come forth some-
  thing to make a greater struggle necessary.




  My call is the call of battle&#8212;I nourish active re-
  bellion?

He going with me must go well armed;

  He going with me goes often with spare diet, poverty,
  angry enemies, desertions.




17

Allons! The road is before us!

  It is safe&#8212;I have tried it&#8212;my own feet have tried it 
  well.



Allons! Be not detain'd!

  Let the paper remain on the desk unwritten, and the 
  book on the shelf unopen'd!


  Let the tools remain in the workshop! let the money 
  remain unearn'd!

Let the school stand! mind not the cry of the teacher!

  Let the preacher preach in the pulpit! let the lawyer 
  plead in the court, and the judge expound the 
  law.



Mon enfant! I give you my hand!
I give you my love, more precious than money,
I give you myself, before preaching or law;

  Will you give me yourself? Will you come travel with 
  me?

Shall we stick by each other as long as we live?









TO THE STATES,
 To Identify the 16th, 17th, or 18th Presidentiad.

  WHY reclining, interrogating? Why myself and all 
  drowsing?


  What deepening twilight! Scum floating atop of the 
  waters!


  Who are they, as bats and night-dogs, askant in the 
  Capitol?


  What a filthy Presidentiad! (O south, your torrid suns!
  O north, your arctic freezings!)


  Judges? Is that the President?


  Then I will sleep a while yet&#8212;for I see that These 
  States sleep, for reasons; 


  (With gathering murk&#8212;with muttering thunder and 
  lambent shoots, we all duly awake,


  South, north, east, west, inland and seaboard, we will 
  surely awake.)




TO A CERTAIN CANTATRICE.

HERE, take this gift!
I was reserving it for some hero, orator, or general,

  One who should serve the good old cause, the great 
  Idea, the progress and freedom of the race; 


  But I see that what I was reserving belongs to you 
  just as much as to any.







TO WORKINGMEN.

1

COME closer to me;
Push close, my lovers, and take the best I possess;

  Yield closer and closer, and give me the best you 
  possess.




  This is unfinish'd business with me&#8212;How is it with 
  you?


  (I was chill'd with the cold types, cylinder, wet paper 
  between us.)



Male and Female!

  I pass so poorly with paper and types, I must pass 
  with the contact of bodies and souls.



American masses!

  I do not thank you for liking me as I am, and liking 
  the touch of me&#8212;I know that it is good for you 
  to do so.




2

This is the poem of occupations;

  In the labor of engines and trades, and the labor of 
  fields, I find the developments,

And find the eternal meanings.


Workmen and Workwomen!

  Were all educations, practical and ornamental, well 
  display'd out of me, what would it amount to?





  Were I as the head teacher, charitable proprietor,
  wise statesman, what would it amount to?


  Were I to you as the boss employing and paying you,
  would that satisfy you?




  The learn'd, virtuous, benevolent, and the usual 
  terms; 

A man like me, and never the usual terms.


Neither a servant nor a master am I;

  I take no sooner a large price than a small price&#8212;I 
  will have my own, whoever enjoys me; 


  I will be even with you, and you shall be even with 
  me.




  If you stand at work in a shop, I stand as nigh as 
  the nighest in the same shop; 


  If you bestow gifts on your brother or dearest friend,
  I demand as good as your brother or dearest 
  friend; 


  If your lover, husband, wife, is welcome by day or 
  night, I must be personally as welcome; 


  If you become degraded, criminal, ill, then I become 
  so for your sake; 


  If you remember your foolish and outlaw'd deeds, do 
  you think I cannot remember my own foolish 
  and outlaw'd deeds?


  If you carouse at the table, I carouse at the opposite 
  side of the table; 


  If you meet some stranger in the streets, and love 
  him or her&#8212;why I often meet strangers in the 
  street, and love them.



Why, what have you thought of yourself?
Is it you then that thought yourself less?

  Is it you that thought the President greater than 
  you?


  Or the rich better off than you? or the educated 
  wiser than you?







  Because you are greasy or pimpled, or that you was 
  once drunk, or a thief,


  Or diseas'd, or rheumatic, or a prostitute, or are so 
  now; 


  Or from frivolity or impotence, or that you are no 
  scholar, and never saw your name in print,

Do you give in that you are any less immortal?



3


  Souls of men and women! it is not you I call un-
  seen, unheard, untouchable and untouching; 


  It is not you I go argue pro and con about, and to 
  settle whether you are alive or no; 

I own publicly who you are, if nobody else owns.



  Grown, half-grown, and babe, of this country and 
  every country, indoors and outdoors, one just 
  as much as the other, I see,

And all else behind or through them.



  The wife&#8212;and she is not one jot less than the 
  husband; 

The daughter&#8212;and she is just as good as the son;

  The mother&#8212;and she is every bit as much as the 
  father.




  Offspring of ignorant and poor, boys apprenticed to 
  trades,


  Young fellows working on farms, and old fellows 
  working on farms,

Sailor-men, merchant-men, coasters, immigrants,

  All these I see&#8212;but nigher and farther the same I 
  see; 


  None shall escape me, and none shall wish to escape 
  me.



I bring what you much need, yet always have,
Not money, amours, dress, eating, but as good;

  I send no agent or medium, offer no representative of 
  value, but offer the value itself.







  There is something that comes home to one now 
  and perpetually; 


  It is not what is printed, preach'd, discuss'd&#8212;it eludes 
  discussion and print; 

It is not to be put in a book&#8212;it is not in this book;

  It is for you, whoever you are&#8212;it is no farther from 
  you than your hearing and sight are from you; 


  It is hinted by nearest, commonest; readiest&#8212;it is 
  ever provoked by them.




  You may read in many languages, yet read nothing 
  about it; 


  You may read the President's Message, and read 
  nothing about it there; 


  Nothing in the reports from the State department or 
  Treasury department, or in the daily papers or 
  the weekly papers,


  Or in the census or revenue returns, prices current,
  or any accounts of stock.




4

The sun and stars that float in the open air;

  The apple-shaped earth, and we upon it&#8212;surely the 
  drift of them is something grand!


  I do not know what it is, except that it is grand, and 
  that it is happiness,


  And that the enclosing purport of us here is not a 
  speculation, or bon-mot, or reconnoissance,


  And that it is not something which by luck may turn 
  out well for us, and without luck must be a 
  failure for us,


  And not something which may yet be retracted in a 
  certain contingency.




  The light and shade, the curious sense of body and 
  identity, the greed that with perfect complais-
  ance devours all things, the endless pride and 
  out-stretching of man, unspeakable joys and 
  sorrows,





  The wonder every one sees in every one else he sees,
  and the wonders that fill each minute of time 
  forever,

What have you reckon'd them for, camerado?

  Have you reckon'd them for a trade, or farm-work?
  or for the profits of a store?


  Or to achieve yourself a position? or to fill a gentle-
  man's leisure, or a lady's leisure?




  Have you reckon'd the landscape took substance and 
  form that it might be painted in a picture?


  Or men and women that they might be written of,
  and songs sung?


  Or the attraction of gravity, and the great laws and 
  harmonious combinations, and the fluids of the 
  air, as subjects for the savans?


  Or the brown land and the blue sea for maps and 
  charts?


  Or the stars to be put in constellations and named 
  fancy names?


  Or that the growth of seeds is for agricultural tables,
  or agriculture itself?




  Old institutions&#8212;these arts, libraries, legends, col-
  lections, and the practice handed along in man-
  ufactures&#8212;will we rate them so high?


  Will we rate our cash and business high ?&#8212;I have no 
  objection; 


  I rate them as high as the highest&#8212;then a child born 
  of a woman and man I rate beyond all rate.




  We thought our Union grand, and our Constitution 
  grand; 


  I do not say they are not grand and good, for they 
  are; 

I am this day just as much in love with them as you;

  Then I am in love with you, and with all my fellows 
  upon the earth.







  We consider bibles and religions divine&#8212;I do not 
  say they are not divine; 


  I say they have all grown out of you, and may grow 
  out of you still; 


  It is not they who give the life&#8212;it is you who give 
  the life; 


  Leaves are not more shed from the trees, or trees 
  from the earth, than they are shed out of you.




5

When the psalm sings instead of the singer;
When the script preaches, instead of the preacher;

  When the pulpit descends and goes, instead of the 
  carver that carved the supporting desk; 


  When I can touch the body of books, by night or by 
  day, and when they touch my body back again; 


  When a university course convinces, like a slumber-
  ing woman and child convince; 


  When the minted gold in the vault smiles like the 
  night-watchman's daughter; 


  When warrantee deeds loafe in chairs opposite, and 
  are my friendly companions; 


  I intend to reach them my hand, and make as much 
  of them as I do of men and women like you.




  The sum of all known reverence I add up in you,
  whoever you are; 


  The President is there in the White House for you&#8212; 
  it is not you who are here for him; 


  The Secretaries act in their bureaus for you&#8212;not you 
  here for them; 

The Congress convenes every Twelfth-month for you;

  Laws, courts, the forming of States, the charters of 
  cities, the going and coming of commerce and 
  mails, are all for you.



List close, my scholars dear!

  All doctrines, all politics and civilization, exurge from 
  you; 





   All sculpture and monuments, and anything inscribed 
  anywhere, are tallied in you; 


  The gist of histories and statistics as far back as the 
  records reach, is in you this hour, and myths 
  and tales the same; 


  If you were not breathing and walking here, where 
  would they all be?


  The most renown'd poems would be ashes, orations 
  and plays would be vacuums.




  All architecture is what you do to it when you look 
  upon it; 


  (Did you think it was in the white or gray stone? or 
  the lines of the arches and cornices?)




  All music is what awakes from you, when you are 
  reminded by the instruments; 


  It is not the violins and the cornets&#8212;it is not the oboe 
  nor the beating drums, nor the score of the 
  baritone singer singing his sweet romanza&#8212;nor 
  that of the men's chorus, nor that of the wo-
  men's chorus,

It is nearer and farther than they.



6

Will the whole come back then?

  Can each see signs of the best by a look in the look-
  ing-glass? is there nothing greater or more?


  Does all sit there with you, with the mystic, unseen 
  Soul?



Strange and hard that paradox true I give;
Objects gross and the unseen Soul are one.


House-building, measuring, sawing the boards;

  Blacksmithing, glass-blowing, nail-making, coopering,
  tin-rooting, shingle-dressing,





  Ship-joining, dock-building, fish-curing, ferrying, flag-
  ging of side-walks by flaggers,


  The pump, the pile-driver, the great derrick, the coal-
  kiln and brick-kiln,


  Coal-mines, and all that is down there,&#8212;the lamps in 
  the darkness, echoes, songs, what meditations,
  what vast native thoughts looking through 
  smutch'd faces,


  Iron-works, forge-fires in the mountains, or by the 
  river-banks&#8212;men around feeling the melt with 
  huge crowbars&#8212;lumps of ore, the due com-
  bining of ore, limestone, coal&#8212;the blast-fur-
  nace and the puddling-furnace, the loup-lump 
  at the bottom of the melt at last&#8212;the rolling-
  mill, the stumpy bars of pig-iron, the strong,
  clean-shaped T-rail for railroads; 


  Oil-works, silk-works, white-lead-works, the sugar-
  house, steam-saws, the great mills and factories; 
    

  Stone-cutting, shapely trimmings, for fa&#231;ades, or win-
  dow or door-lintels&#8212;the mallet, the tooth-
  chisel, the jib to protect the thumb,


  Oakum, the oakum-chisel, the caulking-iron&#8212;the 
  kettle of boiling vault-cement, and the fire un-
  der the kettle,


  The cotton-bale, the stevedore's hook, the saw and 
  buck of the sawyer, the mould of the moulder,
  the working-knife of the butcher, the ice-saw,
  and all the work with ice,


  The implemements for daguerreotyping&#8212;the tools of 
  the rigger, grappler, sail-maker, block-maker,


  Goods of gutta-percha, papier-mache, colors, brushes,
  brush-making, glazier's implements,


  The veneer and glue-pot, the confectioner's ornaments,
  the decanter and glasses, the shears and flat-iron,


  The awl and knee-strap, the pint measure and quart 
  measure, the counter and stool, the writing-
  pen of quill or metal&#8212;the making of all sorts 
  of edged tools,





   The brewery, brewing, the malt, the vats, every thing 
  that is done by brewers, also by wine-makers,
  also vinegar-makers,


  Leather-dressing, coach-making, boiler-making, rope-
  twisting, distilling, sign-painting, lime-burning,
  cotton-picking&#8212;electro-plating, electrotyping,
  stereotyping,


  Stave-machines, planing-machines, reaping-machines,
  ploughing-machines, thrashing-machines, steam 
  wagons,


  The cart of the carman, the omnibus, the ponderous 
  dray; 


  Pyrotechny, letting off color'd fire-works at night,
  fancy figures and jets,


  Beef on the butcher's stall, the slaughter-house of 
  the butcher, the butcher in his killing-clothes,


  The pens of live pork, the killing-hammer, the hog-
  hook, the scalder's tub, gutting, the cutter's 
  cleaver, the packer's maul, and the plenteous 
  winter-work of pork-packing,


  Flour-works, grinding of wheat, rye, maize, rice&#8212;the 
  barrels and the half and quarter barrels, the 
  loaded barges, the high piles on wharves and 
  levees,


  The men, and the work of the men, on railroads,
  coasters, fish-boats, canals; 


  The daily routine of your own or any man's life&#8212;the 
  shop, yard, store, or factory; 


  These shows all near you by day and night&#8212;work-
  men! whoever you are, your daily life!


  In that and them the heft of the heaviest&#8212;in them 
  far more than you estimated, and far less also; 


  In them realities for you and me&#8212;in them poems for 
  you and me; 


  In them, not yourself&#8212;you and your Soul enclose all 
  things, regardless of estimation; 


  In them the development good&#8212;in them, all themes 
  and hints.







  I do not affirm what you see beyond is futile&#8212;I do 
  not advise you to stop; 

I do not say leadings you thought great are not great;
But I say that none lead to greater, than those lead to.



7

Will you seek afar off? You surely come back at last,

  In things best known to you, finding the best, or as 
  good as the best,


  In folks nearest to you finding the sweetest, strongest,
  lovingest; 


  Happiness, knowledge, not in another place, but this 
  place&#8212;not for another hour, but this hour; 


  Man in the first you see or touch&#8212;always in friend,
  brother, nighest neighbor&#8212;Woman in mother,
  lover, wife; 


  The popular tastes and employments taking precedence 
  in poems or any where,


  You workwomen and workmen of these States having 
  your own divine and strong life,

And all else giving place to men and women like you.





DEBRIS.



HE is wisest who has the most caution;
He only wins who goes far enough.




  ANY thing is as good as established, when that is estab-
  lished that will produce it and continue it.







LEAVES OF GRASS.



1.

O HASTENING light!

  O free and extatic! O what I here, preparing, warble 
  for!


  O the sun of the world will ascend, dazzling, and take 
  his height&#8212;and you too will ascend!


  O so amazing and broad&#8212;up there resplendent, dart-
  ing and burning!


  O vision prophetic, stagger'd with weight of light!
  with pouring glories!

O lips of my soul, already becoming powerless!
O ample and grand Presidentiads!
New history! new heroes! I project you!

  Visions of poets! only you really last! O sweep on!
  sweep on!

O heights too swift and dizzy yet!

  O purged and luminous! you threaten me more than 
  I can stand!


  (I must not venture&#8212;the ground under my feet men-
  aces me&#8212;it will not support me;)

O present! I return to you while yet I may!



2.

TEARS! tears! tears!
In the night, in solitude, tears;

  On the white shore dripping, dripping, suck'd in by 
  the sand; 

Tears&#8212;not a star shining&#8212;all dark and desolate;
Moist tears from the eyes of a muffled head:

  &#8212;O who is that ghost?&#8212;that form in the dark, with 
  tears?





   What shapeless lump is that, bent, crouch'd there on 
  the sand?


  Streaming tears&#8212;sobbing tears&#8212;throes, choked with 
  wild cries; 


  O storm, embodied, rising, careering, with swift steps 
  along the beach; 


  O wild and dismal night storm, with wind! O belch-
  ing and desperate!


  O shade, so sedate and decorous by day, with calm 
  countenance and regulated pace; 


  But away, at night, as you fly, none looking&#8212;O then 
  the unloosen'd ocean,

Of tears! tears! tears!



3.

ABOARD, at the ship's helm,
A young steersman, steering with care.


A bell through fog on a sea-coast dolefully ringing,
An ocean-bell&#8212;O a warning bell, rock'd by the waves.



  O you give good notice indeed, you bell by the sea-
  reefs ringing,


  Ringing, ringing, to warn the ship from its wreck-
  place.




  For, as on the alert, O steersman, you mind the 
  bell's admonition,


  The bows turn,&#8212;the freighted ship, tacking, speeds 
  away under her gray sails,


  The beautiful and noble ship, with all her precious 
  wealth, speeds away gaily and safe.




  But O the ship, the immortal ship! O ship aboard 
  the ship!


  O ship of the body&#8212;ship of the soul&#8212;voyaging, voy-
  aging, voyaging.









AMERICAN FEUILLAGE.

AMERICA always!
Always our own feuillage!

  Always Florida's green peninsula! Always the price-
  less delta of Louisiana! Always the cotton-fields 
  of Alabama and Texas!


  Always California's golden hills and hollows&#8212;and the 
  silver mountains of New Mexico! Always soft-
  breath'd Cuba!


  Always the vast slope drain'd by the Southern Sea&#8212; 
  inseparable with the slopes drain'd by the 
  Eastern and Western Seas; 


  The area the eighty-third year of These States&#8212;the 
  three and a half millions of square miles; 


  The eighteen thousand miles of sea-coast and bay-
  coast on the main&#8212;the thirty thousand miles 
  of river navigation,


  The seven millions of distinct families, and the same 
  number of dwellings&#8212;Always these, and more,
  branching forth into numberless branches; 


  Always the free range and diversity! Always the 
  continent of Democracy!


  Always the prairies, pastures, forests, vast cities,
  travelers, Kanada, the snows; 


  Always these compact lands&#8212;lands tied at the hips 
  with the belt stringing the huge oval lakes; 


  Always the West, with strong native persons&#8212;the 
  increasing density there&#8212;the habitans, friendly,
  threatening, ironical, scorning invaders; 


  All sights, South, North, East&#8212;all deeds, promis-
  cuously done at all times,





   All characters, movements, growths&#8212;a few noticed,
  myriads unnoticed,


  Through Mannahatta's streets I walking, these things 
  gathering; 


  On interior rivers, by night, in the glare of pine knots,
  steamboats wooding up; 


  Sunlight by day on the valley of the Susquehanna,
  and on the valleys of the Potomac and Rappa-
  hannock, and the valleys of the Roanoke and 
  Delaware; 


  In their northerly wilds beasts of prey haunting the 
  Adirondacks, the hills&#8212;or lapping the Saginaw 
  waters to drink; 


  In a lonesome inlet, a sheldrake, lost from the flock,
  sitting on the water, rocking silently; 


  In farmers' barns, oxen in the stable, their harvest la-
  bor done&#8212;they rest standing&#8212;they are too tired; 


  Afar on arctic ice, the she-walrus lying drowsily,
  while her cubs play around; 


  The hawk sailing where men have not yet sail'd&#8212;the 
  farthest polar sea, ripply, crystalline, open,
  beyond the floes; 


  White drift spooning ahead, where the ship in the 
  tempest dashes; 


  On solid land, what is done in cities, as the bells all 
  strike midnight together; 


  In primitive woods, the sounds there also sounding&#8212; 
  the howl of the wolf, the scream of the panther,
  and the hoarse bellow of the elk; 


  In winter beneath the hard blue ice of Moosehead 
  Lake&#8212;in summer visible through the clear 
  waters, the great trout swimming; 


  In lower latitudes, in warmer air, in the Carolinas,
  the large black buzzard floating slowly, high 
  beyond the tree tops,


  Below, the red cedar, festoon'd with tylandria&#8212;the 
  pines and cypresses, growing out of the white 
  sand that spreads far and flat; 





  Rude boats descending the big Pedee&#8212;climbing 
  plants, parasites, with color'd flowers and ber-
  ries, enveloping huge trees,


  The waving drapery on the live oak, trailing long and 
  low, noiselessly waved by the wind; 


  The camp of Georgia wagoners, just after dark&#8212;the 
  supper-fires, and the cooking and eating by 
  whites and negroes,


  Thirty or forty great wagons&#8212;the mules, cattle,
  horses, feeding from troughs,


  The shadows, gleams, up under the leaves of the old 
  sycamore-trees&#8212;the flames&#8212;also the black 
  smoke from the pitch-pine, curling and rising; 


  Southern fishermen fishing&#8212;the sounds and inlets of 
  North Carolina's coast&#8212;the shad-fishery and 
  the herring-fishery&#8212;the large sweep-seines&#8212; 
  the windlasses on shore work'd by horses&#8212;the 
  clearing, curing, and packing-houses; 


  Deep in the forest, in piney woods, turpentine drop-
  ping from the incisions in the trees&#8212;There are 
  the turpentine works,


  There are the negroes at work, in good health&#8212;the 
  ground in all directions is cover'd with pine straw.


  &#8212;In Tennessee and Kentucky, slaves busy in the 
  coalings, at the forge, by the furnace-blaze, or 
  at the corn-shucking; 


  In Virginia, the planter's son returning after a long 
  absence, joyfully welcom'd and kiss'd by the 
  aged mulatto nurse; 


  On rivers, boatmen safely moor'd at night-fall, in their 
  boats, under shelter of high banks,


  Some of the younger men dance to the sound of the 
  banjo or fiddle&#8212;others sit on the gunwale,
  smoking and talking; 


  Late in the afternoon, the mocking-bird, the Ameri-
  can mimic, singing in the Great Dismal Swamp 
  &#8212;there are the greenish waters, the resinous 
  odor, the plenteous moss, the cypress tree, and 
  the juniper tree; 





  &#8212;Northward, young men of Mannahatta&#8212;the target 
  company from an excursion returning home at 
  evening&#8212;the musket-muzzles all bear bunches 
  of flowers presented by women; 


  Children at play&#8212;or on his father's lap a young boy 
  fallen asleep, (how his lips move! how he 
  smiles in his sleep!)


  The scout riding on horseback over the plains west of 
  the Mississippi&#8212;he ascends a knoll and sweeps 
  his eye around; 


  California life&#8212;the miner, bearded, dress'd in his 
  rude costume&#8212;the stanch California friendship 
  &#8212;the sweet air&#8212;the graves one, in passing,
  meets, solitary, just aside the horse-path; 


  Down in Texas, the cotton-field, the negro-cabins&#8212; 
  drivers driving mules or oxen before rude carts 
  &#8212;cotton-bales piled on banks and wharves; 


  Encircling all, vast-darting, up and wide, the American 
  Soul, with equal hemisphere&#8212;one love, one 
  Dilation or Pride; 


  &#8212;In arriere, the peace-talk with the Iroquois, the 
  aborigines&#8212;the calumet, the pipe of good-will 
  arbitration, and indorsement,


  The sachem blowing the smoke first toward the sum 
  and then toward the earth,


  The drama of the scalp-dance enacted with painted 
  faces and guttural exclamations,


  The setting out of the war-party&#8212;the long and 
  stealthy march,


  The single-file&#8212;the swinging hatchets&#8212;the surprise 
  and slaughter of enemies; 


  &#8212;All the acts, scenes, ways, persons, attitudes of These 
  States&#8212;reminiscences, all institutions,


  All These States, compact&#8212;Every square mile of 
  These States, without excepting a particle&#8212;you 
  also&#8212;me also,


  Me pleased, rambling in lanes and country fields,
  Paumanok's fields,





  Me, observing the spiral flight of two little yellow 
  butterflies, shuffling between each other, ascend-
  ing high in the air; 


  The darting swallow, the destroyer of insects&#8212;the 
  fall traveler southward, but returning north-
  ward early in the spring; 


  The country boy at the close of the day, driving the 
  herd of cows, and shouting to them as they 
  loiter to browse by the road-side; 


  The city wharf&#8212;Boston, Philadelphia, Baltimore,
  Charleston, New Orleans, San Francisco,


  The departing ships, when the sailors heave at the 
  capstan; 

Evening&#8212;me in my room&#8212;the setting sun,

  The setting summer sun shining in my open window,
  showing the swarm of flies, suspended, balanc-
  ing in the air in the centre of the room, darting 
  athwart, up and down, casting swift shadows in 
  specks on the opposite wall, where the shine is; 


  The athletic American matron speaking in public to 
  crowds of listeners; 


  Males, females, immigrants, combinations&#8212;the co-
  piousness&#8212;the individuality of The States, each 
  for itself&#8212;the money-makers; 


  Factories, machinery, the mechanical forces&#8212;the 
  windlass, lever, pulley&#8212;All certainties,

The certainty of space, increase, freedom, futurity,

  In space, the sporades, the scattered islands, the stars 
  &#8212;on the firm earth, the lands, my lands,


  O lands! all so dear to me&#8212;what you are, (whatever 
  it is), I become a part of that, whatever it is 


  Southward there, I screaming, with wings slow flap-
  ping, with the myriads of gulls wintering along 
  the coasts of Florida&#8212;or in Louisiana, with 
  pelicans breeding,


  Otherways, there, atwixt the banks of the Arkansaw,
  the Rio Grande, the Nueces, the Brazos, the 
  Tombigbee, the Red River, the Saskatchawan,
  or the Osage, I with the spring waters laughing 
  and skipping and running; 





  Northward, on the sands, on some shallow bay of Pau-
  manok, I, with parties of snowy herons wading 
  in the wet to seek worms and aquatic plants; 


  Retreating, triumphantly twittering, the king-bird,
  from piercing the crow with its bill, for amuse-
  ment&#8212;And I triumphantly twittering; 


  The migrating flock of wild geese alighting in autumn 
  to refresh themselves&#8212;the body of the flock 
  feed&#8212;the sentinels outside move around with 
  erect heads watching, and are from time to 
  time reliev'd by other sentinels&#8212;And I feeding 
  and taking turns with the rest; 


  In Kanadian forests, the moose, large as an ox, cor-
  ner'd by hunters, rising desperately on his hind-
  feet, and plunging with his fore-feet, the hoofs 
  as sharp as knives&#8212;And I, plunging at the 
  hunters, corner'd and desperate; 


  In the Mannahatta, streets, piers, shipping, store-
  houses, and the countless workmen working in 
  the shops,


  And I too of the Mannahatta, singing thereof&#8212;and 
  no less in myself than the whole of the Manna-
  hatta in itself,


  Singing the song of These, my ever-united lands&#8212;my 
  body no more inevitably united, part to part,
  and made one identity, any more than my lands 
  are inevitably united, and made ONE IDENTITY; 


  Nativities, climates, the grass of the great Pastoral 
  Plains,


  Cities, labors, death, animals, products, good and evil 
  &#8212;these me,


  These affording, in all their particulars, endless 
  feuillage to me and to America, how can I do 
  less than pass the clew of the union of them, to 
  afford the like to you?


  Whoever you are! how can I but offer you divine 
  leaves, that you also be eligible as I am?


  How can I but, as here, chanting, invite you for your-
  self to collect bouquets of the incomparable 
  feuillage of These States?







MANNAHATTA.


  I was asking for something specific and perfect for 
  my city,

Whereupon, lo! upsprang the aboriginal name!



  Now I see what there is in a name, a word, liquid,
  sane, unruly, musical, self-sufficient; 

I see that the word of my city is that word up there,

  Because I see that word nested in nests of water-bays,
  superb, with tall and wonderful spires,


  Rich, hemm'd thick all around with sailships and 
  steamships&#8212;an island sixteen miles long, solid-
  founded,


  Numberless crowded streets&#8212;high growths of iron,
  slender, strong, light, splendidly uprising to-
  ward clear skies; 


  Tides swift and ample, well-loved by me, toward sun-
  down,


  The flowing sea-currents, the little islands, larger ad-
  joining islands, the heights, the villas,


  The countless masts, the white shore-steamers, the 
  lighters, the ferry-boats, the black sea-steam-
  ers, well model'd; 


  The down-town streets, the jobbers' houses of busi-
  ness&#8212;the houses of business of the ship-mer-
  chants, and money-brokers&#8212;the river-streets; 


  Immigrants arriving, fifteen or twenty thousand in a 
  week; 


  The carts hauling goods&#8212;the manly race of drivers of 
  horses&#8212;the brown-faced sailors; 


  The summer-air, the bright sun shining, and the sail-
  ing clouds aloft; 





   The winter snows, the sleigh-bells&#8212;the broken ice in 
  the river, passing along, up or down, with the 
  flood-tide or-ebb tide; 


  The mechanics of the city, the masters, well-form'd,
  beautiful-faced, looking you straight in the 
  eyes; 


  Trottoirs throng'd&#8212;vehicles&#8212;Broadway&#8212;the women 
  &#8212;the shops and shows,


  The parades, processions, bugles playing, flags flying,
  drums beating; 


  A million people&#8212;manners free and superb&#8212;open 
  voices&#8212;hospitality&#8212;the most courageous and 
  friendly young men; 

The free city! no slaves! no owners of slaves!

  The beautiful city, the city of hurried and sparkling 
  waters! the city of spires and masts!

The city nested in bays! my city!

  The city of such women, I am mad to be with them!
  I will return after death to be with them!


  The city of such young men, I swear I cannot live 
  happy, without I often go talk, walk, eat, drink,
  sleep, with them!





To You.

LET us twain walk aside from the rest;

  Now we are together privately, do you discard cere-
  mony; 


  Come! vouchsafe to me what has yet been vouch-
  safed to none&#8212;Tell me the whole story,


  Tell me what you would not tell your brother, wife,
  husband, or physician.







FRANCE, The 18th Year of These States.


A GREAT year and place;

  A harsh, discordant, natal scream out-sounding, to 
  touch the mother's heart closer than any yet.



I walk'd the shores of my Eastern Sea,
Heard over the waves the little voice,

  Saw the divine infant, where she woke, mournfully 
  wailing, amid the roar of cannon, curses,
  shouts, crash of falling buildings; 


  Was not so sick from the blood in the gutters running 
  &#8212;nor from the single corpses, nor those in 
  heaps, nor those borne away in the tumbrils; 


  Was not so desperate at the battues of death&#8212;was 
  not so shock'd at the repeated fusillades of the 
  guns.




  Pale, silent, stern, what could I say to that long-
  accrued retribution?

Could I wish humanity different?
Could I wish the people made of wood and stone?
Or that there be no justice in destiny or time?


O Liberty! O mate for me!

  Here too the blaze, the bullet and the axe, in reserve,
  to fetch them out in case of need; 

Here too, though long represt, can never be destroy'd;
Here too could rise at last, murdering and extatic;
Here too demanding full arrears of vengeance.


Hence I sign this salute over the sea,
And I do not deny that terrible red birth and baptism,

  But remember the little voice that I heard wailing&#8212; 
  and wait with perfect trust, no matter how 
  long; 





  And from to-day, sad and cogent, I maintain the be-
  queath'd cause, as for all lands,

And I send these words to Paris with my love,

  And I guess some chansonniers there will understand 
  them,


  For I guess there is latent music yet in France&#8212; 
  floods of it; 


  O I hear already the bustle of instruments&#8212;they will 
  soon be drowning all that would interrupt 
  them; 


  O I think the east wind brings a triumphal and free 
  march,

It reaches hither&#8212;it swells me to joyful madness,
I will run transpose it in words, to justify it,
I will yet sing a song for you, ma femme.




A HAND-MIRROR.

  HOLD it up sternly! See this it sends back! (Who is 
  it? Is it you?)

Outside fair costume&#8212;within ashes and filth,

  No more a flashing eye&#8212;no more a sonorous voice or 
  springy step; 

Now some slave's eye, voice, hands, step,

  A drunkard's breath, unwholesome eater's face,
  venerealee's flesh,


  Lungs rotting away piecemeal, stomach sour and can-
  kerous,

Joints rheumatic, bowels clogged with abomination,
Blood circulating dark and poisonous streams,
Words babble, hearing and touch callous,
No brain, no heart left&#8212;no magnetism of sex;

  Such, from one look in this looking-glass ere you go 
  hence,

Such a result so soon&#8212;and from such a beginning!






THOUGHTS.



1.

  OF the visages of things&#8212;And of piercing through 
  to the accepted hells beneath; 


  Of ugliness&#8212;To me there is just as much in it as 
  there is in beauty&#8212;And now the ugliness of 
  human beings is acceptable to me; 


  Of detected persons&#8212;To me, detected persons are 
  not, in any respect, worse than undetected per-
  sons&#8212;and are not in any respect worse than I 
  am myself; 


  Of criminals&#8212;To me, any judge, or any juror, is 
  equally criminal&#8212;and any reputable person is 
  also&#8212;and the President is also.




2.

OF waters, forests, hills;

  Of the earth at large, whispering through medium of 
  me; 


  Of vista&#8212;Suppose some sight in arriere, through the 
  formative chaos, presuming the growth, fulness,
  life, now attain'd on the journey; 


  (But I see the road continued, and the journey ever 
  continued;)


  Of what was once lacking on earth, and in due time 
  has become supplied&#8212;And of what will yet be 
  supplied,


  Because all I see and know, I believe to have purport 
  in what will yet be supplied.







3.

  OF persons arrived at high positions, ceremonies,
  wealth, scholarships, and the like; 


  To me, all that those persons have arrived at, sinks 
  away from them, except as it results to their 
  Bodies and Souls,

So that often to me they appear gaunt and naked;

  And often, to me, each one mocks the others, and 
  mocks himself or herself,


  And of each one, the core of life, namely happiness,
  is full of the rotten excrement of maggots,


  And often, to me, those men and women pass unwit-
  tingly the true realities of life, and go toward 
  false realities,


  And often, to me, they are alive after what custom has 
  served them, but nothing more,


  And often, to me, they are sad, hasty, unwaked son-
  nambules, walking the dusk.




4.

  OF ownership&#8212;As if one fit to own things could not 
  at pleasure enter upon all, and incorporate 
  them into himself or herself; 


  Of Equality&#8212;As if it harm'd me, giving others the 
  same chances and rights as myself&#8212;As if it 
  were not indispensable to my own rights that 
  others possess the same; 


  Of Justice&#8212;As if Justice could be anything but the 
  same ample law, expounded by natural judges 
  and saviors,


  As if it might be this thing or that thing, according 
  to decisions.




5.

  As I sit with others, at a great feast, suddenly, while 
  the music is playing,





   To my mind, (whence it comes I know not,) spectral,
  in mist, of a wreck at sea,


  Of the flower of the marine science of fifty generations,
  founder'd off the Northeast coast, and going 
  down&#8212;Of the steamship Arctic going down,


  Of the veil'd tableau&#8212;Women gather'd together on 
  deck, pale, heroic, waiting the moment that 
  draws so close&#8212;O the moment!


  O the huge sob&#8212;A few bubbles&#8212;the white foam 
  spirting up&#8212;And then the women gone,


  Sinking there, while the passionless wet flows on&#8212; 
  And I now pondering, Are those women indeed 
  gone?

Are Souls drown'd and destroy'd so?
Is only matter triumphant?



6.

  OF what I write from myself&#8212;As if that were not the 
  resum&#233;; 


  Of Histories&#8212;As if such, however complete, were not 
  less complete than my poems; 


  As if the shreds, the records of nations, could possibly 
  be as lasting as my poems; 


  As if here were not the amount of all nations, and of 
  all the lives of heroes.




7.

OF obedience, faith, adhesiveness;

  As I stand aloof and look, there is to me something 
  profoundly affecting in large masses of men,
  following the lead of those who do not believe 
  in men.








TO HIM THAT WAS CRUCIFIED.

MY spirit to yours, dear brother;

  Do not mind because many, sounding your name, do 
  not understand you; 


  I do not sound your name, but I understand you,
  (there are others also;)


  I specify you with joy, O my comrade, to salute you,
  and to salute those who are with you, before 
  and since&#8212;and those to come also,


  That we all labor together, transmitting the same 
  charge and succession; 


  We few, equals, indifferent of lands, indifferent of 
  times; 


  We, enclosers of all continents, all castes&#8212;allowers of 
  all theologies,

Compassionaters, perceivers, rapport of men,

  We walk silent among disputes and assertions, but 
  reject not the disputers, nor any thing that is 
  asserted; 


  We hear the bawling and din&#8212;we are reach'd at by 
  divisions, jealousies, recriminations on every 
  side,


  They close peremptorily upon us, to surround us, my 
  comrade,


  Yet we walk unheld, free, the whole earth over,
  journeying up and down, till we make our in-
  effaceable mark upon time and the diverse eras,


  Till we saturate time and eras, that the men and 
  women of races, ages to come, may prove 
  brethren and lovers, as we are.




TO OLD AGE.

  I SEE in you the estuary that enlarges and spreads 
  itself grandly as it pours in the great Sea.







TO ONE SHORTLY TO DIE.


  FROM all the rest I single out you, having a message 
  for you: 


  You are to die&#8212;Let others tell you what they please,
  I cannot prevaricate,


  I am exact and merciless, but I love you&#8212;There is no 
  escape for you.




  Softly I lay my right hand upon you&#8212;you just feel 
  it,


  I do not argue&#8212;I bend my head close, and half-
  envelop it,

I sit quietly by&#8212;I remain faithful,
I am more than nurse, more than parent or neighbor,

  I absolve you from all except yourself, spiritual, bodily 
  &#8212;that is eternal,

(The corpse you will leave will be but excrementitious.)


The sun bursts through in unlooked-for directions!
Strong thoughts fill you, and confidence&#8212;you smile!
You forget you are sick, as I forget you are sick,

  You do not see the medicines&#8212;you do not mind the 
  weeping friends&#8212;I am with you,


  I exclude others from you&#8212;there is nothing to be 
  commiserated,

I do not commiserate&#8212;I congratulate you.




TO YOU.

  STRANGER! if you, passing, meet me, and desire to 
  speak to me, why should you not speak to me?

And why should I not speak to you?






UNNAMED LANDS.


  NATIONS ten thousand years before These States,
  and many times ten thousand years before 
  These States; 


  Garner'd clusters of ages, that men and women like 
  us grew up and travel'd their course, and 
  pass'd on; 


  What vast-built cities&#8212;what orderly republics&#8212;what 
  pastoral tribes and nomads; 


  What histories, rulers, heroes, perhaps trancending 
  all others; 

What laws, customs, wealth, arts, traditions;

  What sort of marriage&#8212;what costumes&#8212;what phy-
  siology and phrenology; 


  What of liberty and slavery among them&#8212;what they 
  thought of death and the soul; 


  Who were witty and wise&#8212;who beautiful and poetic&#8212; 
  who brutish and undevelop'd; 


  Not a mark, not a record remains&#8212;And yet all re-
  mains.




  O I know that those men and women were not for 
  nothing, any more than we are for nothing; 


  I know that they belong to the scheme of the world 
  every bit as much as we now belong to it, and 
  as all will henceforth belong to it.



Afar they stand&#8212;yet near to me they stand,
Some with oval countenances, learn'd and calm,

  Some naked and savage&#8212;Some like huge collections 
  of insects,


  Some in tents&#8212;herdsmen, patriarchs, tribes, horse-
  men,


  Some prowling through woods&#8212;Some living peacea-
  bly on farms, laboring, reaping, filling barns,


  Some traversing paved avenues, amid temples, pala-
  ces, factories, libraries, shows, courts, theatres,
  wonderful monuments.






Are those billions of men really gone?

  Are those women of the old experience of the earth 
  gone?

Do their lives, cities, arts, rest only with us?
Did they achieve nothing for good, for themselves?



  I believe of all those billions of men and women 
  that fill'd the unnamed lands, every one exists 
  this hour, here or elsewhere, invisible to us, in 
  exact proportion to what he or she grew from 
  in life, and out of what he or she did, felt, be-
  came, loved, sinned, in life.




  I believe that was not the end of those nations, or 
  any person of them, any more than this shall 
  be the end of my nation, or of me; 


  Of their languages, governments, marriage, literature,
  products, games, wars, manners, crimes, pris-
  ons, slaves, heroes, poets, I suspect their re-
  sults curiously await in the yet unseen world&#8212; 
  counterparts of what accrued to them in the 
  seen world,

I suspect I shall meet them there,

  I suspect I shall there find each old particular of those 
  unnamed lands.





KOSMOS.

WHO includes diversity, and is Nature,

  Who is the amplitude of the earth, and the coarseness 
  and sexuality of the earth, and the great char-
  ity of the earth, and the equilibrium also,


  Who has not look'd forth from the windows, the eyes,
  for nothing, or whose brain held audience with 
  messengers for nothing; 





  Who contains believers and disbelievers&#8212;Who is the 
  most majestic lover; 


  Who holds duly his or her triune proportion of real-
  ism, spiritualism, and of the &#230;sthetic, or in-
  tellectual,


  Who, having consider'd the Body, finds all its organs 
  and parts good; 


  Who, out of the theory of the earth, and of his or 
  her body, understands by subtle analogies all 
  other theories,


  The theory of a city, a poem, and of the large poli-
  tics of These States; 


  Who believes not only in our globe, with its sun and 
  moon, but in other globes, with their suns and 
  moons; 


  Who, constructing the house of himself or herself, not 
  for a day, but for all time, sees races, eras, dates,
  generations,


  The past, the future, dwelling there, like space, insep-
  arable together.




WHEN I READ THE BOOK.

WHEN I read the book, the biography famous;

  And is this, then, (said I,) what the author calls a 
  man's life?


  And so will some one, when I am dead and gone,
  write my life?

(As if any man really knew aught of my life;

  As if you, O cunning Soul, did not keep your secret 
  well!)







SAYS.

1.

  I SAY whatever tastes sweet to the most perfect person 
  &#8212;That is finally right.



2.

  I SAY the human shape or face is so great, it must 
  never be made ridiculous; 

I say for ornaments nothing outr&#233; can be allowed,

  And that anything is most beautiful without orna-
  ment,


  And that exaggerations will be sternly revenged in 
  your own physiology; and in other persons' phys-
  iology also; 


  And I say that clean-shaped children can be jetted and 
  conceiv'd only where natural forms prevail in 
  public, and the human face and form are never 
  caricatured; 


  And I say that genius need never more be turn'd to 
  romances,


  (For facts properly told, how mean appear all ro-
  mances.)



3.

  I HAVE said many times that materials and the Soul 
  are great, and that all depends on physique; 


  Now I reverse what I said, and affirm that all depends 
  on the &#230;sthetic, or intellectual,


  And that criticism is great&#8212;and that refinement is 
  greatest of all; 


  And I affirm now that the mind governs&#8212;and that all 
  depends on the mind.






4.

  WITH one man or woman&#8212;(no matter which one&#8212;I 
  even pick out the lowest,)

With him or her I now illustrate the whole law;

  I say that every right, in politics or what-not, shall be 
  eligible to that one man or woman, on the same 
  terms as any.





DESPAIRING CRIES.

1

  DESPAIRING cries float ceaselessly toward me, day and 
  night,


  The sad voice of Death&#8212;the call of my nearest lover,
  putting forth, alarm'd, uncertain,

The Sea I am quickly to sail, come tell me,

  Come tell me where I am speeding&#8212;tell me my destina- 
  tion. 



2
I understand your anguish, but I cannot help you,

  I approach, hear, behold&#8212;the sad mouth, the look 
  out of the eyes, your mute inquiry,

Whither I go from the bed I recline on, come tell me:

  Old age, alarm'd, uncertain&#8212;A young woman's voice,
  appealing to me for comfort; 

A young man's voice, Shall I not escape?




PICTURE.

A THOUSAND perfect men and women appear,

  Around each gathers a cluster of friends, and gay 
  children and youths, with offerings.







POEMS OF JOY.

1

 O TO make the most jubilant poems!

  O full of music! Full of manhood, womanhood, in-
  fancy!


  O full of common employments! Full of grain and 
  trees.




  O for the voices of animals! O for the swiftness 
  and balance of fishes!

O for the dropping of rain-drops in a poem!
O for the sunshine, and motion of waves in a poem.



  O to be on the sea! the wind, the wide waters 
  around; 

O to sail in a ship under full sail at sea.



  O the joy of my spirit! It is uncaged! It darts 
  like lightning!


  It is not enough to have this globe, or a certain time 
  &#8212;I will have thousands of globes, and all time.




2

O the engineer's joys
To go with a locomotive!

  To hear the hiss of steam&#8212;the merry shriek&#8212;the 
  steam-whistle&#8212;the laughing locomotive!


  To push with resistless way, and speed off in the dis-
  tance.






O the horseman's and horsewoman's joys!

  The saddle&#8212;the gallop&#8212;the pressure upon the seat 
  &#8212;the cool gurgling by the ears and hair.




3

O the fireman's joys!
I hear the alarm at dead of night,
I hear bells&#8212;shouts!&#8212;I pass the crowd&#8212;I run!
The sight of the flames maddens me with pleasure.



  O the joy of the strong-brawn'd fighter, towering 
  in the arena, in perfect condition, conscious of 
  power, thirsting to meet his opponent.




  O the joy of that vast elemental sympathy which 
  only the human Soul is capable of generating 
  and emitting in steady and limitless floods.




4

O the mother's joys!

  The watching&#8212;the endurance&#8212;the precious love&#8212; 
  the anguish&#8212;the patiently yielded life.



O the joy of increase, growth, recuperation,

  The joy of soothing and pacifying&#8212;the joy of con-
  cord and harmony.



O to go back to the place where I was born!
To hear the birds sing once more!

  To ramble about the house and barn, and over the 
  fields, once more,


  And through the orchard and along the old lanes 
  once more.




5

O male and female!

  O the presence of women! (I swear there is nothing 
  more exquisite than the presence of women;)





  O for the girl, my mate! O for the happiness with 
  my mate!


  O the young man as I pass! O I am sick after 
  the friendship of him who, I fear, is indifferent 
  to me.



O the streets of cities!

  The flitting faces&#8212;the expressions, eyes, feet, cos-
  tumes! O I cannot tell how welcome they are 
  to me; 


  O, of the men&#8212;of women toward me as I pass&#8212;The 
  memory of only one look&#8212;the boy lingering 
  and waiting.




6


  O to have been brought up on bays, lagoons, creeks 
  or along the coast!

O to continue and be employ'd there all my life!

  O the briny and damp smell&#8212;the shore&#8212;the salt 
  weeds exposed at low water,


  The work of fishermen&#8212;the work of the eel-fisher 
  and clam-fisher.



O it is I!

  I come with my clam-rake and spade! I come with 
  my eel-spear; 


  Is the tide out? I join the group of clam-diggers on 
  the flats,


  I laugh and work with them&#8212;I joke at my work, like 
  a mettlesome young man.




  In winter I take my eel-basket and eel-spear and 
  travel out on foot on the ice&#8212;I have a small 
  axe to cut holes in the ice; 


  Behold me, well-clothed, going gaily, or returning in 
  the afternoon&#8212;my brood of tough boys accom-
  panying me,





  My brood of grown and part-grown boys, who love 
  to be with no one else so well as they love to 
  be with me,


  By day to work with me, and by night to sleep with 
  me.




  Or, another time, in warm weather, out in a boat,
  to lift the lobster-pots, where they are sunk 
  with heavy stones, (I know the buoys;)


  O the sweetness of the Fifth-month morning upon 
  the water, as I row, just before sunrise, toward 
  the buoys; 


  I pull the wicker pots up slantingly&#8212;the dark green 
  lobsters are desperate with their claws, as I 
  take them out&#8212;I insert wooden pegs in the 
  joints of their pincers,


  I go to all the places, one after another, and then row 
  back to the shore,


  There, in a huge kettle of boiling water, the lobsters 
  shall be boil'd till their color becomes scarlet.



Or, another time, mackerel-taking,

  Voracious, mad for the hook, near the surface, they 
  seem to fill the water for miles; 


  Or, another time, fishing for rock-fish in Chesapeake 
  Bay&#8212;I one of the brown-faced crew; 


  Or, another time, trailing for blue-fish off Paumanok,
  I stand with braced body,


  My left foot is on the gunwale&#8212;my right arm throws 
  the coils of slender rope,


  In sight around me the quick veering and darting of 
  fifty skiffs, my companions.




7

O boating on the rivers!

  The voyage down the Niagara, (the St. Lawrence,)&#8212; 
  the superb scenery&#8212;the steamers,





  The ships sailing&#8212;the Thousand Islands&#8212;the occa-
  sional timber-raft, and the raftsmen with long-
  reaching sweep-oars,


  The little huts on the rafts, and the stream of smoke 
  when they cook supper at evening.



O something pernicious and dread!
Something far away from a puny and pious life!
Something unproved! Something in a trance!

  Something escaped from the anchorage, and driving 
  free.



O to work in mines, or forging iron!

  Foundry casting&#8212;the foundry itself&#8212;the rude high 
  roof&#8212;the ample and shadow'd space,

The furnace&#8212;the hot liquid pour'd out and running.



8

O the joys of the soldier!

  To feel the presence of a brave general! to feel his 
  sympathy!


  To behold his calmness! to be warm'd in the rays of 
  his smile!


  To go to battle! to hear the bugles play, and the 
  drums beat!


  To hear the crash of artillery! to see the glittering of 
  the bayonets and musket-barrels in the sun!

To see men fall and die and not complain!
To taste the savage taste of blood! to be so devilish!
To gloat so over the wounds and deaths of the enemy.



9


  O the whaleman's joys! O I cruise my old cruise 
  again!


  I feel the ship's motion under me&#8212;I feel the Atlan-
  tic breezes fanning me,


  I hear the cry again sent down from the mast-head,
  There she blows, 





  Again I spring up the rigging, to look with the rest&#8212; 
  We see&#8212;we descend, wild with excitement,


  I leap in the lower'd boat&#8212;We row toward our prey,
  where he lies,


  We approach, stealthy and silent&#8212;I see the moun-
  tainous mass, lethargic, basking,


  I see the harpooner standing up&#8212;I see the weapon 
  dart from his vigorous arm; 


  O swift, again, now, far out in the ocean, the wounded 
  whale, settling, running to windward, tows me,

Again I see him rise to breathe&#8212;We row close again,

  I see a lance driven through his side, press'd deep,
  turn'd in the wound,


  Again we back off&#8212;I see him settle again&#8212;the life is 
  leaving him fast,


  As he rises, he spouts blood&#8212;I see him swim in circles 
  narrower and narrower, swiftly cutting the 
  water&#8212;I see him die,


  He gives one convulsive leap in the centre of the cir-
  cle, and then falls flat and still in the bloody 
  foam.




10

O the old manhood of me, my joy!

  My children and grand-children&#8212;my white hair and 
  beard,


  My largeness, calmness, majesty, out of the long 
  stretch of my life.



O the ripen'd joy of womanhood!
O perfect happiness at last!

  I am more than eighty years of age&#8212;my hair, too, is 
  pure white&#8212;I am the most venerable mother; 


  How clear is my mind! how all people draw nigh to 
  me!


  What attractions are these, beyond any before? what 
  bloom, more than the bloom of youth?


  What beauty is this that descends upon me, and rises 
  out of me?







  O the joy of my soul leaning poised on itself&#8212;re-
  ceiving identity through materials, and loving 
  them&#8212;observing characters, and absorbing 
  them; 


  O my soul, vibrated back to me, from them&#8212;from 
  facts, sight, hearing, touch, my phrenology,
  reason, articulation, comparison, memory, and 
  the like; 


  O the real life of my senses and flesh, transcending 
  my senses and flesh; 


  O my body, done with materials&#8212;my sight, done with 
  my material eyes; 


  O what is proved to me this day, beyond cavil, that it 
  is not my material eyes which finally see,


  Nor my material body which finally loves, walks,
  laughs, shouts, embraces, procreates.






11

O the farmer's joys!

  Ohioan's, Illinoisian's, Wisconsinese', Kanadian's, Io-
  wan's, Kansian's, Missourian's, Oregonese' joys,

To rise at peep of day, and pass forth nimbly to work,
To plow land in the fall for winter-sown crops,
To plough land in the spring for maize,

  To train orchards&#8212;to graft the trees&#8212;to gather ap-
  ples in the fall.



O the pleasure with trees!

  The orchard&#8212;the forest&#8212;the oak, cedar, pine, pekan-
  tree,


  The honey-locust, black-walnut, cottonwood, and mag-
  nolia.




12

O Death!

  O the beautiful touch of Death, soothing and be-
  numbing a few moments, for reasons; 





  O that of myself, discharging my excrementitious 
  body, to be burn'd, or render'd to powder, or 
  buried,

My real body doubtless left to me for other spheres,

  My voided body, nothing more to me, returning to 
  the purifications, further offices, eternal uses of 
  the earth.




13


  O to bathe in the swimming-bath, or in a good 
  place along shore!


  To splash the water! to walk ankle-deep&#8212;to race 
  naked along the shore.



O to realize space!
The plenteousness of all&#8212;that there are no bounds;

  To emerge, and be of the sky&#8212;of the sun and moon,
  and the flying clouds, as one with them.




14

O, while I live, to be the ruler of life&#8212;not a slave,
To meet life as a powerful conquerer,

  No fumes&#8212;no ennui&#8212;no more complaints or scornful 
  criticisms.



O me repellent and ugly!

  To these proud laws of the air, the water, and the 
  ground, proving my interior Soul impregnable,
  And nothing exterior shall ever take command of me.



O to attract by more than attraction!

  How it is I know not&#8212;yet behold! the something 
  which obeys none of the rest,


  It is offensive, never defensive&#8212;yet how magnetic it 
  draws.




15

O the joy of suffering!

  To struggle against great odds! to meet enemies un-
  daunted!





  To be entirely alone with them! to find how much one 
  can stand!


  To look strife, torture, prison, popular odium, death,
  face to face!


  To mount the scaffold! to advance to the muzzles of 
  guns with perfect nonchalance!

To be indeed a God!


O the gleesome saunter over fields and hill-sides!

  The leaves and flowers of the commonest weeds&#8212;the 
  moist fresh stillness of the woods,


  The exquisite smell of the earth at day-break, and all 
  through the forenoon.



O love-branches! love-root! love-apples!
O chaste and electric torrents! O mad-sweet drops.


O the orator's joys!

  To inflate the chest&#8212;to roll the thunder of the voice 
  out from the ribs and throat,


  To make the people rage, weep, hate, desire, with 
  yourself,


  To lead America&#8212;to quell America with a great 
  tongue.



O the joy of a manly self-hood!

  Personality&#8212;to be servile to none&#8212;to defer to none 
  &#8212;not to any tyrant, known or unknown,


  To walk with erect carriage, a step springy and 
  elastic,

To look with calm gaze, or with a flashing eye,

  To speak with a full and sonorous voice, out of a 
  broad chest,


  To confront with your personality all the other per-
  sonalities of the earth.



O to have my life henceforth my poem of joys!

  To dance, clap hands, exult, shout, skip, leap, roll on,
  float on,

An athlete&#8212;full of rich words&#8212;full of joys.








RESPONDEZ!

RESPONDEZ! Respondez!

  Let every one answer! let those who sleep be waked!
  let none evade!


  (How much longer must we go on with our affectations 
  and sneaking?


  Let me bring this to a close&#8212;I pronounce openly for 
  a new distribution of roles;)


  Let that which stood in front go behind! and let that 
  which was behind advance to the front and 
  speak; 


  Let murderers, thieves, bigots, fools, unclean persons,
  offer new propositions!

Let the old propositions be postponed!

  Let faces and theories be turn'd inside out! Let 
  meanings be freely criminal, as well as results!


  Let there be no suggestion above the suggestion of 
  drudgery!


  Let none be pointed toward his destination! (Say! do 
  you know your destination?)


  Let trillions of men and women be mock'd with bodies 
  and mock'd with Souls!


  Let the love that waits in them, wait! Let it die, or 
  pass still-born to other spheres!


  Let the sympathy that waits in every man, wait! or let 
  it also pass, a dwarf, to other spheres!


  Let contradictions prevail! Let one thing contradict 
  another! and let one line of my poems contra-
  dict another!


  Let the people sprawl with yearning aimless hands!
  Let their tongues be broken! Let their eyes be 
  discouraged! Let none descend into their hearts 
  with the fresh lusciousness of love!


  Let the theory of America be management, caste,
  comparison! (Say! what other theory would 
  you?)


  Let them that distrust birth and death lead the rest!
  (Say! why shall they not lead you?)





  Let the crust of hell be near'd and trod on! Let the 
  days be darker than the nights! Let slumber 
  bring less slumber than waking-time brings!


  Let the world never appear to him or her for whom it 
  was all made!


  Let the heart of the young man exile itself from the 
  heart of the old man! and let the heart of the 
  old man be exiled from that of the young man!


  Let the sun and moon go! Let scenery take the ap-
  plause of the audience! Let there be apathy 
  under the stars!


  Let freedom prove no man's inalienable right! Every 
  one who can tyrannize, let him tyrannize to his 
  satisfaction!

Let none but infidels be countenanced!

  Let the eminence of meanness, treachery, sarcasm,
  hate, greed, indecency, impotence, lust, be taken 
  for granted above all! Let writers, judges, gov-
  ernments, households, religions, philosophies,
  take such for granted above all!


  Let the worst men beget children out of the worst 
  women!

Let the priest still play at immortality!
Let death be inaugurated!

  Let nothing remain but the ashes of teachers, artists,
  moralists, lawyers, and learn'd and polite per-
  sons!

Let him who is without my poems be assassinated!

  Let the cow, the horse, the camel, the garden-bee&#8212;Let 
  the mud-fish, the lobster, the mussel, eel, the 
  stingfish&#8212;Let these,
  and the like of these, be put on a perfect equal-
  ity with man and woman!


  Let churches accommodate serpents, vermin, and the 
  corpses of those who have died of the most 
  filthy of diseases!


  Let marriage slip down among fools, and be for none 
  but fools!





  Let men among themselves talk and think obscenely 
  of women! and let women among themselves 
  talk and think obscenely of men!


  Let every man doubt every woman! and let every 
  woman trick every man!


  Let us all, without missing one, be exposed in public,
  naked, monthly, at the peril of our lives! Let 
  our bodies be freely handled and examined by 
  whoever chooses!


  Let nothing but copies be permitted to exist upon the 
  earth!


  Let the earth desert God, nor let there never hence-
  forth be mention'd the name of God!

Let there be no God!

  Let there be money, business, imports, exports, cus-
  tom, authority, precedents, pallor, dyspepsia,
  smut, ignorance, unbelief!


  Let judges and criminals be transposed! Let the 
  prison-keepers be put in prison! Let those that 
  were prisoners take the keys! (Say! why might 
  they not just as well be transposed?)


  Let the slaves be masters! Let the masters become 
  slaves!


  Let the reformers descend from the stands where they 
  are forever bawling! Let an idiot or insane 
  person appear on each of the stands!


  Let the Asiatic, the African, the European, the Ameri-
  can, and the Australian, go armed against the 
  murderous stealthiness of each other! Let them 
  sleep armed! Let none believe in good will!


  Let there be no unfashionable wisdom! Let such be 
  scorn'd and derided off from the earth!


  Let a floating cloud in the sky&#8212;Let a wave of the sea 
  &#8212;Let growing mint, spinach, onions, tomatoes 
  &#8212;Let these be exhibited as shows at a great 
  price for admission!


  Let all the men of These States stand aside for a few 
  smouchers! Let the few seize on what they 
  choose! Let the rest gawk, giggle, starve, obey!





  Let shadows be furnish'd with genitals! Let substances 
  be deprived of their genitals!


  Let there be wealthy and immense cities&#8212;but through 
  any of them, not a single poet, savior, knower,
  lover!


  Let the infidels of These States laugh all faith away!
  If one man be found who has faith, let the rest 
  set upon him! Let them affright faith! Let 
  them destroy the power of breeding faith!


  Let the she-harlots and the he-harlots be prudent!
  Let them dance on, while seeming lasts! (O 
  seeming! seeming! seeming!)


  Let the preachers recite creeds! Let them teach only 
  what they have been taught!

Let insanity have charge of sanity!

  Let books take the place of trees, animals, rivers,
  clouds!

Let the daub'd portraits of heroes supersede heroes!

  Let the manhood of man never take steps after itself!
  Let it take steps after eunuchs, and after con-
  sumptive and genteel persons!


  Let the white person tread the black person under his 
  heel! (Say! which is trodden under heel, after 
  all?)


  Let the reflections of the things of the world be studied 
  in mirrors! Let the things themselves continue 
  unstudied!


  Let a man seek pleasure everywhere except in him-
  self! Let a woman seek happiness everywhere 
  except in herself! (What real happiness have 
  you had one single time through your whole 
  life?)


  Let the limited years of life do nothing for the limit-
  less years of death! (What do you suppose 
  death will do, then?)







THE CITY DEAD-HOUSE.

BY the City Dead-House, by the gate,
As idly sauntering, wending my way from the clangor,

  I curious pause&#8212;for lo! an outcast form, a poor dead 
  prostitute brought; 


  Her corpse they deposit unclaim'd, it lies on the 
  damp brick pavement; 


  The divine woman, her body&#8212;I see the Body&#8212;I look 
  on it alone,


  That house once full of passion and beauty&#8212;all else I 
  notice not; 


  Nor stillness so cold, nor running water from faucet,
  nor odors morbific impress me; 


  But the house alone&#8212;that wondrous house&#8212;that de-
  licate fair house&#8212;that ruin!


  That immortal house, more than all the rows of dwel-
  lings ever built!


  Or white-domed Capitol itself, with magestic figure sur-
  mounted&#8212;or all the old high-spired cathedrals,


  That little house alone, more than them all&#8212;poor,
  desperate house!

Fair, fearful wreck! tenement of a Soul! itself a Soul!

  Unclaim'd, avoided house! take one breath from my 
  tremulous lips; 

Take one tear, dropt aside as I go, for thought of you,

  Dead house of love! house of madness and sin, crum-
  bled! crush'd!


  House of life&#8212;erewhile talking and laughing&#8212;but 
  ah, poor house! dead, even then; 


  Months, years, an echoing, garnish'd house&#8212;but 
  dead, dead, dead.




LEAFLETS.

  WHAT General has a good army in himself, has a good 
  army; 

He happy in himself, or she happy in herself, is happy.






LEAVES OF GRASS.


1.

THINK of the Soul;

  I swear to you that body of yours gives proportions 
  to your Soul somehow to live in other spheres; 

I do not know how, but I know it is so.


Think of loving and being loved;

  I swear to you, whoever you are, you can interfuse 
  yourself with such things that everybody that 
  sees you shall look longingly upon you.



Think of the past;

  I warn you that in a little while, others will find their 
  past in you and your times.




  The race is never separated&#8212;nor man nor woman 
  escapes; 


  All is inextricable&#8212;things, spirits, nature, nations,
  you too&#8212;from precedents you come.




  Recall the ever-welcome defiers, (The mothers pre-
  cede them;)


  Recall the sages, poets, saviors, inventors, lawgivers,
  of the earth; 


  Recall Christ, brother of rejected persons&#8212;brother of 
  slaves, felons, idiots, and of insane and diseas'd 
  persons.



Think of the time when you was not yet born;
Think of times you stood at the side of the dying;
Think of the time when your own body will be dying.





Think of spiritual results,

  Sure as the earth swims through the heavens, does 
  every one of its objects pass into spiritual 
  results.



Think of manhood, and you to be a man;

  Do you count manhood, and the sweet of manhood,
  nothing?



Think of womanhood, and you to be a woman;
The creation is womanhood;
Have I not said that womanhood involves all?

  Have I not told how the universe has nothing better 
  than the best womanhood?





2.

  UNFOLDED out of the folds of the woman, man comes 
  unfolded, and is always to come unfolded; 


  Unfolded only out of the superbest woman of the 
  earth, is to come the superbest man of the 
  earth; 


  Unfolded out of the friendliest woman, is to come the 
  friendliest man; 


  Unfolded only out of the perfect body of a woman,
  can a man be form'd of perfect body; 


  Unfolded only out of the inimitable poem of the wo-
  man, can come the poems of man&#8212;(only 
  thence have my poems come;)


  Unfolded out of the strong and arrogant woman I 
  love, only thence can appear the strong and 
  arrogant man I love; 


  Unfolded by brawny embraces from the well-muscled 
  woman I love, only thence come the brawny 
  embraces of the man; 


  Unfolded out of the folds of the woman's brain, come 
  all the folds of the man's brain, duly obedient; 





  Unfolded out of the justice of the woman, all justice 
  is unfolded; 


  Unfolded out of the sympathy of the woman is all 
  sympathy: 


  A man is a great thing upon the earth, and through 
  eternity&#8212;but every jot of the greatness of man 
  is unfolded out of woman,


  First the man is shaped in the woman, he can then be 
  shaped in himself.






3.

NIGHT on the prairies;

  The supper is over&#8212;the fire on the ground burns 
  low; 

The wearied emigrants sleep, wrapt in their blankets;

  I walk by myself&#8212;I stand and look at the stars,
  which I think now I never realized before.



Now I absorb immortality and peace,
I admire death, and test propositions.


How plenteous! How spiritual! How resum&#233;!

  The same Old Man and Soul&#8212;the same old aspira-
  tions, and the same content.




  I was thinking the day most splendid, till I saw 
  what the not-day exhibited,


  I was thinking this globe enough, till there sprang 
  out so noiseless around me myriads of other 
  globes.




  Now, while the great thoughts of space and eternity 
  fill me, I will measure myself by them; 


  And now, touch'd with the lives of other globes, ar-
  rived as far along as those of the earth,





  Or waiting to arrive, or pass'd on farther than those 
  of the earth,


  I henceforth no more ignore them, than I ignore my 
  own life,


  Or the lives of the earth arrived as far as mine, or 
  waiting to arrive.




  O I see now that life cannot exhibit all to me&#8212;as 
  the day cannot,


  I see that I am to wait for what will be exhibited by 
  death.





4.

THE world below the brine;

  Forests at the bottom of the sea&#8212;the branches and 
  leaves,


  Sea-lettuce, vast lichens, strange flowers and seeds&#8212; 
  the thick tangle, the openings, and the pink 
  turf,


  Different colors, pale gray and green, purple, white,
  and gold&#8212;the play of light through the water,


  Dumb swimmers there among the rocks&#8212;coral, gluten,
  grass, rushes&#8212;and the aliment of the swimmers,


  Sluggish existences grazing there, suspended, or 
  slowly crawling close to the bottom,


  The sperm-whale at the surface, blowing air and 
  spray, or disporting with his flukes,


  The leaden-eyed shark, the walrus, the turtle, the 
  hairy sea-leopard, and the sting-ray; 


  Passions there&#8212;wars, pursuits, tribes&#8212;sight in those 
  ocean-depths&#8212;breathing that thick-breathing 
  air, as so many do; 


  The change thence to the sight here, and to the subtle 
  air breathed by beings like us, who walk this 
  sphere; 


  The change onward from ours, to that of beings who 
  walk other spheres.







5.

  I SIT and look out upon all the sorrows of the world,
  and upon all oppression and shame; 


  I hear secret convulsive sobs from young men, at an-
  guish with themselves, remorseful after deeds 
  done; 


  I see, in low life, the mother misused by her children,
  dying, neglected, gaunt, desperate; 


  I see the wife misused by her husband&#8212;I see the 
  treacherous seducer of young women; 


  I mark the ranklings of jealousy and unrequited 
  love, attempted to be hid&#8212;I see these sights 
  on the earth; 


  I see the workings of battle, pestilence, tyranny&#8212;I 
  see martyrs and prisoners; 


  I observe a famine at sea&#8212;I observe the sailors cast-
  ing lots who shall be kill'd, to preserve the 
  lives of the rest; 


  I observe the slights and degradations cast by arro-
  gant persons upon laborers, the poor, and upon 
  negroes, and the like; 


  All these&#8212;All the meanness and agony without end,
  I sitting, look out upon,

See, hear, and am silent.




VISOR'D.

A MASK&#8212;a perpetual natural disguiser of herself,
Concealing her face, concealing her form,

  Changes and transformations every hour, every mo-
  ment,

Falling upon her even when she sleeps.






NOT THE PILOT.

  NOT the pilot has charged himself to bring his ship 
  into port, though beaten back, and many times 
  baffled; 


  Not the path-finder, penetrating inland, weary and 
  long,


  By deserts parch'd, snows-chill'd, rivers wet, perse-
  veres till he reaches his destination,


  More than I have charged myself, heeded or un-
  heeded, to compose a free march for These 
  States,


  To be exhilarating music to them, years, centuries 
  hence.




AS IF A PHANTOM CARESS'D ME.

As if a phantom caress'd me,
I thought I was not alone, walking here by the shore;

  But the one I thought was with me, as now I walk by 
  the shore, the one I loved that caress'd me,


  As I lean and look through the glimmering light&#8212; 
  that one has utterly disappear'd,


  And those appear that are hateful to me, and mock 
  me.




PICTURE.

  WOMEN sit, or move to and fro&#8212;some old, some 
  young; 


  The young are beautiful&#8212;but the old are more beauti-
  ful than the young.







GREAT ARE THE MYTHS.


GREAT are the myths&#8212;I too delight in them;

  Great are Adam and Eve&#8212;I too look back and accept 
  them; 


  Great the risen and fallen nations, and their poets,
  women, sages, inventors, rulers, warriors, and 
  priests.




  Great is Liberty! great is Equality! I am their 
  follower; 


  Helmsmen of nations, choose your craft! where you 
  sail, I sail,

I weather it out with you, or sink with you.



  Great is Youth&#8212;equally great is Old Age&#8212;great 
  are the Day and night; 


  Great is Wealth&#8212;great is Poverty&#8212;great is Expres-
  sion&#8212;great is Silence.




  Youth, large, lusty, loving&#8212;Youth, full of grace,
  force, fascination!


  Do you know that Old Age may come after you, with 
  equal grace, force, fascination?




  Day, full-blown and splendid&#8212;Day of the immense 
  sun, action, ambition, laughter,


  The Night follows close, with millions of suns, and 
  sleep, and restoring darkness.







  Wealth, with the flush hand, fine clothes, hospi-
  tality; 


  But then the Soul's wealth, which is candor, knowl-
  edge, pride, enfolding love; 


  (Who goes for men and women showing Poverty 
  richer than wealth?)




  (Expression of speech! in what is written or said,
  forget not that Silence is also expressive,


  That anguish as hot as the hottest, and contempt as 
  cold as the coldest, may be without words.)




  Great is the Earth, and the way it became what it 
  is; 


  Do you imagine it has stopt at this? the increase 
  abandon'd?


  Understand then that it goes as far onward from this,
  as this is from the times when it lay in cover-
  ing waters and gases, before man had appear'd.



Great is the quality of Truth in man;

  The quality of truth in man supports itself through 
  all changes,


  It is inevitably in the man&#8212;he and it are in love, and 
  never leave each other.




  The truth in man is no dictum, it is vital as eye-
  sight; 


  If there be any Soul, there is truth&#8212;if there be man 
  or woman, there is truth&#8212;if there be physical 
  or moral, there is truth; 


  If there be equilibrium or volition, there is truth&#8212;if 
  there be things at all upon the earth, there is 
  truth.




  O truth of the earth! O truth of things! I am de-
  termin'd to press my way toward you; 


  Sound your voice! I scale mountains, or dive in the 
  sea after you.







  Great is Language&#8212;it is the mightiest of the sci-
  ences,


  It is the fulness, color, form, diversity of the earth,
  and of men and women, and of all qualities 
  and processes; 


  It is greater than wealth&#8212;it is greater than buildings,
  ships, religions, paintings, music.




  Great is the English speech&#8212;what speech is so 
  great as the English?


  Great is the English brood&#8212;what brood has so vast a 
  destiny as the English ?


  It is the mother of the brood that must rule the earth 
  with the new rule; 


  The new rule shall rule as the Soul rules, and as the 
  love, justice, equality in the Soul rule.




  Great is law&#8212;great are the old few land-marks of 
  the law,


  They are the same in all times, and shall not be dis-
  turb'd.



Great is Justice!

  Justice is not settled by legislators and laws&#8212;it is in 
  the Soul; 


  It cannot be varied by statutes, any more than love,
  pride, the attraction of gravity, can; 


  It is immutable&#8212;it does not depend on majorities&#8212; 
  majorities or what not, come at last before the 
  same passionless and exact tribunal.




  For justice are the grand natural lawyers, and per-
  fect judges&#8212;is it in their Souls; 


  It is well assorted&#8212;they have not studied for nothing 
  &#8212;the great includes the less; 


  They rule on the highest grounds&#8212;they oversee all 
  eras, states, administrations.







  The perfect judge fears nothing&#8212;he could go front 
  to front before God; 


  Before the perfect judge all shall stand back&#8212;life and 
  death shall stand back&#8212;heaven and hell shall 
  stand back.




  Great is Life, real and mystical, wherever and who-
  ever; 


  Great is Death&#8212;sure as life holds all parts together,
  Death holds all parts together.




  Has Life much purport?&#8212;Ah, Death has the greatest 
  purport.







NOW LIST TO MY MORNING'S ROMANZA.

Now list to my morning's romanza;

  To the cities and farms I sing, as they spread in the 
  sunshine before me.




  A young man came to me bearing a message from 
  his brother; 


  How should the young man know the whether and 
  when of his brother?

Tell him to send me the signs.



  And I stood before the young man face to face, and 
  took his right hand in my left hand, and his left 
  hand in my right hand,


  And I answer'd for his brother, and for men, and I 
  answer'd for THE POET, and sent these signs.




  Him all wait for&#8212;him all yield up to&#8212;his word is 
  decisive and final,





  Him they accept, in him lave, in him perceive them-
  selves, as amid light,

Him they immerse, and he immerses them.



  Beautiful women, the haughtiest nations, laws, the 
  landscape, people, animals,


  The profound earth and its attributes, and the unquiet 
  ocean, (so tell I my morning's romanza;)


  All enjoyments and properties, and money, and what-
  ever money will buy,


  The best farms&#8212;others toiling and planting, and he 
  unavoidably reaps,


  The noblest and costliest cities&#8212;others grading and 
  building, and he domiciles there,


  Nothing for any one, but what is for him&#8212;near and 
  far are for him, the ships in the offing,


  The perpetual shows and marches on land, are for him,
  if they are for any body.



He puts things in their attitudes;

  He puts to-day out of himself, with plasticity and 
  love; 


  He places his own city, times, reminiscences, parents,
  brothers and sisters, associations, employment,
  politics, so that the rest never shame them after-
  ward, nor assume to command them.



He is the answerer;

  What can be answer'd he answers&#8212;and what cannot 
  be answer'd, he shows how it cannot be answer'd.



A man is a summons and challenge;

  (It is vain to skulk&#8212;Do you hear that mocking and 
  laughter? Do you hear the ironical echoes?)




  Books, friendships, philosophers, priests, action,
  pleasure, pride, beat up and down, seeking to 
  give satisfaction; 





  He indicates the satisfaction, and indicates them that 
  beat up and down also.




  Whichever the sex, whatever the season or place, he 
  may go freshly and gently and safely, by day or 
  by night; 


  He has the pass-key of hearts&#8212;to him the response 
  of the prying of hands on the knobs.




  His welcome is universal&#8212;the flow of beauty is not 
  more welcome or universal than he is; 


  The person he favors by day or sleeps with at night is 
  blessed.




  Every existence has its idiom&#8212;everything has an 
  idiom and tongue; 


  He resolves all tongues into his own, and bestows it 
  upon men, and any man translates, and any man 
  translates himself also; 


  One part does not counteract another part&#8212;he is the 
  joiner&#8212;he sees how they join.




  He says indifferently and alike, How are you, friend? 
  to the President at his levee,


  And he says, Good-day, my brother! to Cudge that 
  hoes in the sugar-field,


  And both understand him, and know that his speech 
  is right.



He walks with perfect ease in the Capitol,

  He walks among the Congress, and one representative 
  says to another, Here is our equal, appearing and 
  new.



Then the mechanics take him for a mechanic,

  And the soldiers suppose him to be a soldier, and the 
  sailors that he has follow'd the sea,





  And the authors take him for an author, and the 
  artists for an artist,


  And the laborers perceive he could labor with them 
  and love them; 


  No matter what the work is, that he is the one to 
  follow it, or has follow'd it,


  No matter what the nation, that he might find his 
  brothers and sisters there.




  The English believe he comes of their English 
  stock,


  A Jew to the Jew he seems&#8212;a Russ to the Russ&#8212; 
  usual and near, removed from none.




  Whoever he looks at in the traveler's coffee-house 
  claims him,


  The Italian or Frenchman is sure, and the German is 
  sure, and the Spaniard is sure, and the island 
  Cuban is sure; 


  The engineer, the deck-hand on the great lakes, or on 
  the Mississippi, or St. Lawrence, or Sacramento,
  or Hudson, or Paumanok Sound, claims him.




  The gentleman of perfect blood acknowledges his 
  perfect blood; 


  The insulter, the prostitute, the angry person, the 
  beggar, see themselves in the ways of him&#8212;he 
  strangely transmutes them,


  They are not vile any more&#8212;they hardly know them-
  selves, they are so grown.








BURIAL.

1

To think of it!
To think of time&#8212;of all that retrospection!

  To think of to-day and the ages continued hence-
  forward!



Have you guess'd you yourself would not continue?
Have you dreaded these earth-beetles?
Have you fear'd the future would be nothing to you?



  Is to-day nothing? Is the beginningless past 
  nothing ?


  If the future is nothing, they are just as surely 
  nothing.




  To think that the sun rose in the east! that men 
  and women were flexible, real, alive! that every-
  thing was alive!


  To think that you and I did not see, feel, think, nor 
  bear our part!

To think that we are now here, and bear our part !



2


  Not a day passes&#8212;not a minute or second, without 
  an accouchement!


  Not a day passes&#8212;not a minute or second, without a 
  corpse!



The dull nights go over, and the dull days also,
The soreness of lying so much in bed goes over,

  The physician, after long putting off, gives the silent 
  and terrible look for an answer,





  The children come hurried and weeping, and the 
  brothers and sisters are sent for,


  Medicines stand unused on the shelf&#8212;(the camphor-
  smell has long pervaded the rooms,)


  The faithful hand of the living does not desert the 
  hand of the dying,


  The twitching lips press lightly on the forehead of the 
  dying,

The breath ceases, and the pulse of the heart ceases,

  The corpse stretches on the bed, and the living look 
  upon it,

It is palpable as the living are palpable.



  The living look upon the corpse with their eye-
  sight,


  But without eye-sight lingers a different living, and 
  looks curiously on the corpse.




3


  To think that the rivers will flow, and the snow 
  fall, and fruits ripen, and act upon others as 
  upon us now&#8212;yet not act upon us!


  To think of all these wonders of city and country,
  and others taking great interest in them&#8212;and 
  we taking no interest in them!



To think how eager we are in building our houses!

  To think others shall be just as eager, and we quite 
  indifferent!




  I see one building the house that serves him a few 
  years, or seventy or eighty years at most,


  I see one building the house that serves him longer 
  than that.




  Slow-moving and black lines creep over the whole 
  earth&#8212;they never cease&#8212;they are the burial 
  lines,





  He that was President was buried, and he that is now 
  President shall surely be buried.




4


  Cold dash of waves at the ferry-wharf&#8212;posh and 
  ice in the river, half-frozen mud in the streets,
  a gray discouraged sky overhead, the short last 
  daylight of Twelfth-month,


  A hearse and stages&#8212;other vehicles give place&#8212;the 
  funeral of an old Broadway stage-driver, the 
  cortege mostly drivers.




  Steady the trot to the cemetery, duly rattles the 
  death-bell, the gate is pass'd, the new-dug grave 
  is halted at, the living alight, the hearse un-
  closes,


  The coffin is pass'd out, lower'd and settled, the whip 
  is laid on the coffin, the earth is swiftly shovel'd 
  in,

The mound above is flatted with the spades&#8212;silence,
A minute, no one moves or speaks&#8212;it is done,
He is decently put away&#8212;is there anything more ?



  He was a good fellow, free-mouth'd, quick-temper'd,
  not bad-looking, able to take his own part,
  witty, sensitive to a slight, ready with life or 
  death for a friend, fond of women, gambled, ate 
  hearty, drank hearty, had known what it was to 
  be flush, grew low-spirited toward the last,
  sicken'd, was help'd by a contribution, died,
  aged forty-one years&#8212;and that was his funeral.




  Thumb extended, finger uplifted, apron, cape, gloves,
  strap, wet-weather clothes, whip carefully 
  chosen, boss, spotter, starter, hostler, somebody 
  loafing on you, you loafing on somebody, head-
  way, man before and man behind, good day's 
  work, bad day's work, pet stock, mean stock,
  first out, last out, turning-in at night; 





  To think that these are so much and so nigh to other 
  drivers&#8212;and he there takes no interest in 
  them!




5


  The markets, the government, the working-man's 
  wages&#8212;to think what account they are through 
  our nights and days!


  To think that other working-men will make just as 
  great account of them&#8212;yet we make little or 
  no account!




  The vulgar and the refined&#8212;what you call sin, and 
  what you call goodness&#8212;to think how wide a 
  difference!


  To think the difference will still continue to others,
  yet we lie beyond the difference.



To think how much pleasure there is!

  Have you pleasure from looking at the sky? have you 
  pleasure from poems?


  Do you enjoy yourself in the city? or engaged in 
  business? or planning a nomination and elec-
  tion? or with your wife and family?


  Or with your mother and sisters? or in womanly 
  house-work? or the beautiful maternal cares?


  These also flow onward to others&#8212;you and I flow 
  onward,


  But in due time you and I shall take less interest in 
  them.




  Your farm, profits, crops,&#8212;to think how engross'd 
  you are!


  To think there will still be farms, profits, crops&#8212;yet 
  for you, of what avail?




6

What will be, will be well&#8212;for what is, is well,

  To take interest is well, and not to take interest shall 
  be well.






The sky continues beautiful,

  The pleasure of men with women shall never be sated,
  nor the pleasure of women with men, nor the 
  pleasure from poems,


  The domestic joys, the daily housework or business,
  the building of houses&#8212;these are not phan- 
  tasms&#8212;they have weight, form, location; 


  Farms, profits, crops, markets, wages, government,
  are none of them phantasms,


  The difference between sin and goodness is no de-
  lusion,


  The earth is not an echo&#8212;man and his life, and all the 
  things of his life, are well-consider'd.




  You are not thrown to the winds&#8212;you gather cer-
  tainly and safely around yourself; 

Yourself! Yourself! Yourself, forever and ever !



7


  It is not to diffuse you that you were born of your 
  mother and father&#8212;it is to identify you,


  It is not that you should be undecided, but that you 
  should be decided; 


  Something long preparing and formless is arrived and 
  form'd in you,

You are henceforth secure, whatever comes or goes.



  The threads that were spun are gathered, the weft 
  crosses the warp, the pattern is systematic.



The preparations have everyone been justified,

  The orchestra have sufficiently tuned their instru-
  ments&#8212;the baton has given the signal.




  The guest that was coming&#8212;he waited long, for 
  reasons&#8212;he is now housed,


  He is one of those who are beautiful and happy&#8212;he 
  is one of those that to look upon and be with 
  is enough.






The law of the past cannot be eluded,
The law of the present and future cannot be eluded,
The law of the living cannot be eluded&#8212;it is eternal,

  The law of promotion and transformation cannot be 
  eluded,

The law of heroes and good-doers cannot be eluded,

  The law of drunkards, informers, mean persons&#8212;not 
  one iota thereof can be eluded.




8


  Slow moving and black lines go ceaselessly over the 
  earth,


  Northerner goes carried, and Southerner goes carried,
  and they on the Atlantic side, and they on 
  the Pacific, and they between, and all through 
  the Mississippi country, and all over the earth.




  The great masters and kosmos are well as they go 
  &#8212;the heroes and good-doers are well,


  The known leaders and inventors, and the rich own-
  ers and pious and distinguish'd, may be well,


  But there is more account than that&#8212;there is strict 
  account of all.




  The interminable hordes of the ignorant and 
  wicked are not nothing,

The barbarians of Africa and Asia are not nothing,

  The common people of Europe are not nothing&#8212; 
  the American aborigines are not nothing,


  The infected in the immigrant hospital are not noth-
  ing&#8212;the murderer or mean person is not 
  nothing,


  The perpetual successions of shallow people are not 
  nothing as they go,


  The lowest prostitute is not nothing&#8212;the mocker of 
  religion is not nothing as he goes.







9

I shall go with the rest&#8212;we have satisfaction,

  I have dream'd that we are not to be changed so 
  much, nor the law of us changed,


  I have dream'd that heroes and good-doers shall be 
  under the present and past law,


  And that murderers, drunkards, liars, shall be under 
  the present and past law,


  For I have dream'd that the law they are under now 
  is enough.




  And I have dream'd that the satisfaction is not so 
  much changed, and that there is no life with-
  out satisfaction: 


  What is the earth? what are Body and Soul, without 
  satisfaction?



I shall go with the rest,

  We cannot be stopt at a given point&#8212;that is no satis-
  faction,


  To show us a good thing, or a few good things, for a 
  space of time&#8212;that is no satisfaction,


  We must have the indestructible breed of the best,
  regardless of time.




  If otherwise, all these things came but to ashes of 
  dung,


  If maggots and rats ended us, then alarum! for we are 
  betray'd!

Then indeed suspicion of death.



  Do you suspect death? If I were to suspect death,
  I should die now,


  Do you think I could walk pleasantly and well-suited 
  toward annihilation?




10

Pleasantly and well-suited I walk,
Whither I walk I cannot define, but I know it is good,



The whole universe indicates that it is good,
The past and the present indicate that it is good.



  How beautiful and perfect are the animals! How 
  perfect is my Soul!

How perfect the earth, and the minutest thing upon it!

  What is called good is perfect, and what is called bad 
  is just as perfect,


  The vegetables and minerals are all perfect, and the 
  imponderable fluids are perfect; 


  Slowly and surely they have pass'd on to this, and 
  slowly and surely they yet pass on.



My Soul! if I realize you, I have satisfaction,

  Animals and vegetables! if I realize you, I have sat-
  isfaction,


  Laws of the earth and air! if I realize you, I have 
  satisfaction.



I cannot define my satisfaction, yet it is so,
I cannot define my life, yet it is so.



11

It comes to me now!

  I swear I think now that everything without excep-
  tion has an eternal Soul!


  The trees have, rooted in the ground! the weeds of 
  the sea have! the animals!



I swear I think there is nothing but immortality!

  That the exquisite scheme is for it, and the nebulous 
  float is for it, and the cohering is for it; 


  And all preparation is for it! and identity is for it!
  and life and death are altogether for it!









THIS COMPOST!


  SOMETHING startles me where I thought I was 
  safest; 

I withdraw from the still woods I loved;
I will not go now on the pastures to walk;

  I will not strip the clothes from my body to meet my 
  lover the sea; 


  I will not touch my flesh to the earth, as to other 
  flesh, to renew me.



O how can the ground not sicken?
How can you be alive, you growths of spring?

  How can you furnish health, you blood of herbs,
  roots, orchards, grain?


  Are they not continually putting distemper'd corpses 
  in you?


  Is not every continent work'd over and over with sour 
  dead?



Where have you disposed of their carcasses?

  Those drunkards and gluttons of so many genera-
  tions; 


  Where have you drawn off all the foul liquid and 
  meat?


  I do not see any of it upon you to-day&#8212;or perhaps I 
  am deceiv'd; 


  I will run a furrow with my plough&#8212;I will press my 
  spade through the sod, and turn it up under-
  neath; 

I am sure I shall expose some of the foul meat.


Behold this compost! behold it well!

  Perhaps every mite has once form'd part of a sick 
  person&#8212;Yet behold!

The grass covers the prairies,

  The bean bursts noiselessly through the mould in the 
  garden,




The delicate spear of the onion pierces upward,
The apple-buds cluster together on the apple-branches,

  The resurrection of the wheat appears with pale visage 
  out of its graves,


  The tinge awakes over the willow-tree and the mul-
  berry-tree,


  The he-birds carol mornings and evenings, while the 
  she-birds sit on their nests,

The young of poultry break through the hatch'd eggs,

  The new-born of animals appear&#8212;the calf is dropt 
  from the cow, the colt from the mare,


  Out of its little hill faithfully rise the potato's dark 
  green leaves,

Out of its hill rises the yellow maize-stalk;

  The summer growth is innocent and disdainful above 
  all those strata of sour dead.



What chemistry!
That the winds are really not infectious,

  That this is no cheat, this transparent green-wash of 
  the sea, which is so amorous after me,


  That it is safe to allow it to lick my naked body all 
  over with its tongues,


  That it will not endanger me with the fevers that 
  have deposited themselves in it,

That all is clean forever and forever,
That the cool drink from the well tastes so good,
That blackberries are so flavorous and juicy,

  That the fruits of the apple-orchard, and of the 
  orange-orchard&#8212;that melons, grapes, peaches,
  plums, will none of them poison me,


  That when I recline on the grass I do not catch any 
  disease,


  Though probably every spear of grass rises out of 
  what was once a catching disease.




  Now I am terrified at the earth! it is that calm and 
  patient,

It grows such sweet things out of such corruptions,




  It turns harmless and stainless on its axis, with such 
  endless successions of diseas'd corpses,


  It distils such exquisite winds out of such infused 
  fetor,


  It renews with such unwitting looks, its prodigal,
  annual, sumptuous crops,


  It gives such divine materials to men, and accepts 
  such leavings from them at last.





I HEAR AMERICA SINGING.

I HEAR America singing, the varied carols I hear;

  Those of mechanics&#8212;each one singing his, as it 
  should be, blithe and strong; 


  The carpenter singing his, as he measures his plank 
  or beam,


  The mason singing his, as he makes ready for work,
  or leaves off work; 


  The boatman singing what belongs to him in his boat 
  &#8212;the deck-hand singing on the steamboat 
  deck; 


  The shoemaker singing as he sits on his bench&#8212;the 
  hatter singing as he stands; 


  The wood-cutter's song&#8212;the ploughboy's, on his way 
  in the morning, or at the noon intermission, or 
  at sundown; 


  The delicious singing of the mother&#8212;or of the young 
  wife at work&#8212;or of the girl sewing or washing 
  &#8212;Each singing what belongs to her, and to 
  none else; 


  The day what belongs to the day&#8212;At night, the 
  party of young fellows, robust, friendly,


  Singing, with open mouths, their strong melodious 
  songs.







Manhattan's Streets I Saunter'd, Pondering.


MANHATTAN'S streets I saunter'd pondering,

  On time, space, reality&#8212;on such as these, and abreast 
  with them, prudence.




  After all, the last explanation remains to be made 
  about prudence,


  Little and large alike drop quietly aside from the pru-
  dence that suits immortality.



The Soul is of itself;
All verges to it&#8212;all has reference to what ensues;
All that a person does, says, thinks, is of consequence;

  Not a move can a man or woman make, that affects 
  him or her in a day, month, any part of the di-
  rect life-time, or the hour of death, but the 
  same affects him or her onward afterward 
  through the indirect life-time.



The indirect is just as much as the direct,

  The spirit receives from the body just as much as it 
  gives to the body, if not more.




  Not one word or deed&#8212;not venereal sore, discolor-
  ation, privacy of the onanist, putridity of glut-
  tons or rum-drinkers, peculation, cunning,
  betrayal, murder, seduction, prostitution, but 
  has results beyond death, as really as before 
  death.




  Charity and personal force are the only investments 
  worth anything.







  No specification is necessary&#8212;all that a male or fe-
  male does, that is vigorous, benevolent, clean,
  is so much profit to him or her, in the unshak-
  able order of the universe, and through the 
  whole scope of it forever.



Who has been wise, receives interest,

  Savage, felon, President, judge, farmer, sailor, me-
  chanic, literat, young, old, it is the same,

The interest will come round&#8212;all will come round.



  Singly, wholly, to affect now, affected their time,
  will forever affect, all of the past, and all of the 
  present, and all of the future,

All the brave actions of war and peace,

  All help given to relatives, strangers, the poor, old,
  sorrowful, young children, widows, the sick, and 
  to shunned persons,

All furtherance of fugitives, and of the escape of slaves,

  All self-denial that stood steady and aloof on wrecks,
  and saw others fill the seats of the boats,


  All offering of substance or life for the good old cause,
  or for a friend's sake, or opinion's sake,

All pains of enthusiasts, scoffed at by their neighbors,

  All the limitless sweet love and precious suffering of 
  mothers,


  All honest men baffled in strifes recorded or unre-
  corded,


  All the grandeur and good of ancient nations whose 
  fragments we inherit,


  All the good of the hundreds of ancient nations un-
  known to us by name, date, location,


  All that was ever manfully begun, whether it suc-
  ceeded or no,


  All suggestions of the divine mind of man, or the 
  divinity of his mouth, or the shaping of his 
  great hands; 





  All that is well thought or said this day on any part 
  of the globe&#8212;or on any of the wandering stars,
  or on any of the fix'd stars, by those there as 
  we are here,


  All that is henceforth to be thought or done by you,      
  whoever you are, or by any one,


  These inure, have inured, shall inure, to the identities 
  from which they sprang, or shall spring.



Did you guess anything lived only its moment?

  The world does not so exist&#8212;no parts palpable or 
  impalpable so exist,


  No consummation exists without being from some 
  long previous consummation&#8212;and that from 
  some other,


  Without the farthest conceivable one coming a bit 
  nearer the beginning than any.



Whatever satisfies Souls is true;

  Prudence entirely satisfies the craving and glut of 
  Souls; 

Itself only finally satisfies the Soul;

  The Soul has that measureless pride which revolts 
  from every lesson but its own.



Now I give you an inkling;

  Now I breathe the word of the prudence that walks 
  abreast with time, space, reality,


  That answers the pride which refuses every lesson but 
  its own.



What is prudence, is indivisible,
Declines to separate one part of life from every part,

  Divides not the righteous from the unrighteous, or 
  the living from the dead,

Matches every thought or act by its correlative,
Knows no possible forgiveness or deputed atonement,




  Knows that the young man who composedly peril'd 
  his life and lost it, has done exceedingly well 
  for himself, without doubt,


  That he who never peril'd his life, but retains it to 
  old age in riches and ease, has probably 
  achiev'd nothing for himself worth mentioning; 


  Knows that only that person has really learn'd who 
  has learn'd to prefer results,

Who favors Body and Soul the same,

  Who perceives the indirect assuredly following the 
  direct,


  Who in his spirit in any emergency whatever neither 
  hurries or avoids death.





I WAS LOOKING A LONG WHILE.

  I was looking a long while for the history of the past 
  for myself, and for these chants&#8212;and now I 
  have found it; 


  It is not in those paged fables in the libraries, (them 
  I neither accept nor reject;)

It is no more in the legends than in all else;
It is in the present&#8212;it is this earth to-day;

  It is in Democracy&#8212;in this America&#8212;the old world 
  also; 


  It is the life of one man or one woman to-day, the 
  average man of to-day; 

It is languages, social customs, literatures, arts;

  It is the broad show of artificial things, ships, ma-
  chinery, politics, creeds, modern improvements,
  and the interchange of nations,

All for the average man of to-day.






THE INDICATIONS.


THE indications, and tally of time;
Perfect sanity shows the master among philosophs;
Time, always without flaw, indicates itself in parts;

  What always indicates the poet, is the crowd of the 
  pleasant company of singers, and their words; 


  The words of the singers are the hours or minutes of 
  the light or dark&#8212;but the words of the maker 
  of poems are the general light and dark; 


  The maker of poems settles justice, reality, immor-
  tality,


  His insight and power encircle things and the human 
  race,


  He is the glory and extract, thus far, of things, and 
  of the human race.



The singers do not beget&#8212;only the POET begets;

  The singers are welcom'd, understood, appear often 
  enough&#8212;but rare has the day been, likewise 
  the spot, of the birth of the maker of poems,


  Not every century, or every five centuries, has con-
  tain'd such a day, for all its names.




  The singers of successive hours of centuries may 
  have ostensible names, but the name of each of 
  them is one of the singers,


  The name of each is, eye-singer, ear-singer, head-
  singer, sweet-singer, echo-singer, parlor-singer,
  love-singer, or something else.




  All this time, and at all times, wait the words of 
  poems; 


  The greatness of sons is the exuding of the greatness 
  of mothers and fathers,





  The words of poems are the tuft and final applause of 
  science.




  Divine instinct, breadth of vision, the law of rea-
  son, health, rudeness of body, withdrawnness,
  gayety, sun-tan, air-sweetness&#8212;such are some 
  of the words of poems.



The sailor and traveler underlie the maker of poems,

  The builder, geometer, chemist, anatomist, phrenolo-
  gist, artist&#8212;all these underlie the maker of 
  poems.




  The words of the true poems give you more than 
  poems,


  They give you to form for yourself, poems, religions,
  politics, war, peace, behavior, histories, essays,
  romances, and everything else,


  They balance ranks, colors, races, creeds, and the 
  sexes,

They do not seek beauty&#8212;they are sought,

  Forever touching them, or close upon them, follows 
  beauty, longing, fain, love-sick.




  They prepare for death&#8212;yet are they not the finish,
  but rather the outset,


  They bring none to his or her terminus, or to be con-
  tent and full; 


  Whom they take, they take into space, to behold the 
  birth of stars, to behold one of the meanings,


  To launch off with absolute faith&#8212;to sweep through 
  the ceaseless rings, and never be quiet again.








LEAVES OF GRASS.


1.

On the beach at night alone,

  As the old mother sways her to and fro, singing her 
  savage and husky song,


  As I watch the bright stars shining&#8212;I think a thought 
  of the clef of the universes, and of the future.



A VAST SIMILITUDE interlocks all,

  All spheres, grown, ungrown, small, large, suns, moons,
  planets, comets, asteroids,


  All the substances of the same, and all that is spiritual 
  upon the same,

All distances of place, however wide,
All distances of time&#8212;all inanimate forms,

  All Souls&#8212;all living bodies, though they be ever so 
  different, or in different worlds,


  All gaseous, watery, vegetable, mineral processes&#8212;the 
  fishes, the brutes,

All men and women&#8212;me also;
All nations, colors, barbarisms, civilizations, languages;

  All identities that have existed, or may exist, on this 
  globe, or any globe; 

All lives and deaths&#8212;all of the past, present, future;

  This vast similitude spans them, and always has 
  spann'd, and shall forever span them, and com-
  pactly hold them.





2.

TO ORATISTS&#8212;to male or female,

  Vocalism, breath, measure, concentration, determina-
  tion, and the divine power to use words.







  Are you full-lung'd and limber-lipp'd from long 
  trial? from vigorous practice? from physique?

Do you move in these broad lands as broad as they?
Come duly to the divine power to use words?



  For only at last, after many years&#8212;after chastity,
  friendship, procreation, prudence, and naked-
  ness; 

After treading ground and breasting river and lake;

  After a loosen'd throat&#8212;after absorbing eras, temper-
  aments, races&#8212;after knowledge, freedom,
  crimes; 


  After complete faith&#8212;after clarifyings, elevations, and 
  removing obstructions; 


  After these, and more, it is just possible there comes 
  to a man, a woman, the divine power to use 
  words.




  Then toward that man or that woman, swiftly hasten 
  all&#8212;None refuse, all attend; 


  Armies, ships, antiquities, the dead, libraries, paintings,
  machines, cities, hate, despair, amity, pain, theft,
  murder, aspiration, form in close ranks; 


  They debouch as they are wanted to march obediently 
  through the mouth of that man, or that woman.



O I see arise orators fit for inland America;

  And I see it is as slow to become an orator as to be-
  come a man; 

And I see that power is folded in a great vocalism.



  Of a great vocalism, the merciless light thereof shall 
  pour, and the storm rage,

Every flash shall be a revelation, an insult,

  The glaring flame on depths, on heights, on suns, on 
  stars,

On the interior and exterior of man or woman,
On the laws of Nature&#8212;on passive materials,




  On what you called death&#8212;(and what to you there-
  fore was death,

As far as there can be death.)






3.

LAWS for Creations,

  For strong artists and leaders&#8212;for fresh broods of 
  teachers, and perfect literats for America,

For diverse savans, and coming musicians.



  All must have reference to the ensemble of the 
  world, and the compact truth of the world; 


  There shall be no subject too pronounced&#8212;All works 
  shall illustrate the divine law of indirections.



What do you suppose creation is?

  What do you suppose will satisfy the Soul, except to 
  walk free, and own no superior?


  What do you suppose I have intimated to you in a 
  hundred ways, but that man or woman is as 
  good as God?


  And that there is no God any more divine than Your-
  self?


  And that that is what the oldest and newest myths 
  finally mean?


  And that you or any one must approach Creations 
  through such laws?







4.

POETS to come!

  Not to-day is to justify me, and Democracy, and what 
  we are for; 





   But you, a new brood, native, athletic, continental,
  greater than before known,

You must justify me.



  I but write one or two indicative words for the 
  future,


  I but advance a moment, only to wheel and hurry back 
  in the darkness.




  I am a man who, sauntering along, without fully 
  stopping, turns a casual look upon you, and 
  then averts his face,

Leaving it to you to prove and define it,
Expecting the main things from you.





ME IMPERTURBE.

ME imperturbe, standing at ease in Nature,

  Master of all, or mistress of all&#8212;aplomb in the midst 
  of irrational things,

Imbued as they&#8212;passive, receptive, silent as they,

  Finding my occupation, poverty, notoriety, foibles,
  crimes, less important than I thought; 


  Me private, or public, or menial, or solitary&#8212;all these 
  subordinate, (I am eternally equal with the 
  best&#8212;I am not subordinate;)


  Me toward the Mexican Sea, or in the Mannahatta,
  or the Tennessee, or far north, or inland,


  A river-man, or a man of the woods, or of any farm-
  life of These States, or of the coast, or the 
  lakes, or Kanada,


  Me, wherever my life is lived, O to be self-balanced 
  for contingencies!


  O to confront night, storms, hunger, ridicule, acci-
  dents, rebuffs, as the trees and animals do.







SLEEP-CHASINGS.

1

I WANDER all night in my vision,

  Stepping with light feet, swiftly and noiselessly step-
  ping and stopping,

Bending with open eyes over the shut eyes of sleepers,

  Wandering and confused, lost to myself, ill-assorted,
  contradictory,

Pausing, gazing, bending, and stopping.


How solemn they look there, stretch'd and still!

  How quiet they breathe, the little children in their 
  cradles!




  The wretched features of ennuy&#233;s, the white fea-
  tures of corpses, the livid faces of drunkards,
  the sick-gray faces of onanists,


  The gash'd bodies on battle-fields, the insane in their 
  strong-door'd rooms, the sacred idiots, the new-
  born emerging from gates, and the dying emer-
  ging from gates,

The night pervades them and infolds them.



  The married couple sleep calmly in their bed&#8212;he 
  with his palm on the hip of the wife, and she 
  with her palm on the hip of the husband,

The sisters sleep lovingly side by side in their bed,
The men sleep lovingly side by side in theirs,

  And the mother sleeps, with her little child carefully 
  wrap't.






The blind sleep, and the deaf and dumb sleep,

  The prisoner sleeps well in the prison&#8212;the run-away 
  son sleeps; 


  The murderer that is to be hung next day&#8212;how does 
  he sleep?

And the murder'd person&#8212;how does he sleep?


The female that loves unrequited sleeps,
And the male that loves unrequited sleeps,

  The head of the money-maker that plotted all day 
  sleeps,


  And the enraged and treacherous dispositions&#8212;all,
  all sleep.




2


  I stand in the dark with drooping eyes by the 
  worst-suffering and the most restless,


  I pass my hands soothingly to and fro a few inches 
  from them,

The restless sink in their beds&#8212;they fitfully sleep.


Now I pierce the darkness&#8212;new beings appear,
The earth recedes from me into the night,

  I saw that it was beautiful, and I see that what is not 
  the earth is beautiful.




  I go from bedside to bedside&#8212;I sleep close with 
  the other sleepers, each in turn,


  I dream in my dream all the dreams of the other 
  dreamers,

And I become the other dreamers.



3


  I am a dance&#8212;Play up, there! the fit is whirling 
  me fast!




  I am the ever-laughing&#8212;it is new moon and twi-
  light,





  I see the hiding of douceurs&#8212;I see nimble ghosts 
  whichever way I look,


  Cache, and cache again, deep in the ground and sea,
  and where it is neither ground or sea.




  Well do they do their jobs, those journeymen di-
  vine,


  Only from me can they hide nothing, and would not 
  if they could,


  I reckon I am their boss, and they make me a pet 
  besides,


  And surround me and lead me, and run ahead when 
  I walk,


  To lift their cunning covers, to signify me with 
  stretch'd arms, and resume the way; 


  Onward we move! a gay gang of blackguards! with 
  mirth-shouting music, and wild-flapping pen-
  nants of joy!



I am the actor, the actress, the voter, the politician;

  The emigrant and the exile, the criminal that stood 
  in the box,


  He who has been famous, and he who shall be famous 
  after to-day,


  The stammerer, the well-form'd person, the wasted or 
  feeble person.




  I am she who adorn'd herself and folded her hair 
  expectantly,

My truant lover has come, and it is dark.


Double yourself and receive me, darkness!

  Receive me and my lover too&#8212;he will not let me go 
  without him.




  I roll myself upon you, as upon a bed&#8212;I resign 
  myself to the dusk.




  He whom I call answers me, and takes the place of 
  my lover,

He rises with me silently from the bed.






  Darkness! you are gentler than my lover&#8212;his flesh 
  was sweaty and panting,

I feel the hot moisture yet that he left me.



  My hands are spread forth, I pass them in all direc-
  tions,


  I would sound up the shadowy shore to which you are 
  journeying.




  Be careful, darkness! already, what was it touch'd 
  me?


  I thought my lover had gone, else darkness and he are 
  one,

I hear the heart-beat&#8212;I follow, I fade away.


O hot-cheek'd and blushing! O foolish hectic!

  O for pity's sake, no one must see me now! my clothes 
  were stolen while I was abed,

Now I am thrust forth, where shall I run?



  Pier that I saw dimly last night, when I look'd from 
  the windows!


  Pier out from the main, let me catch myself with you,
  and stay&#8212;I will not chafe you,

I feel ashamed to go naked about the world.



  I am curious to know where my feet stand&#8212;and 
  what this is flooding me, childhood or manhood 
  &#8212;and the hunger that crosses the bridge 
  between.



The cloth laps a first sweet eating and drinking,

  Laps life-swelling yolks&#8212;laps ear of rose-corn, milky 
  and just ripen'd; 


  The white teeth stay, and the boss-tooth advances in 
  darkness,


  And liquor is spill'd on lips and bosoms by touching 
  glasses, and the best liquor afterward.







4

I descend my western course, my sinews are flaccid,

  Perfume and youth course through me, and I am their 
  wake.




  It is my face yellow and wrinkled, instead of the 
  old woman's,


  I sit low in a straw-bottom chair, and carefully darn 
  my grandson's stockings.




  It is I too, the sleepless widow, looking out on the 
  winter midnight,


  I see the sparkles of starshine on the icy and pallid 
  earth.




  A shroud I see, and I am the shroud&#8212;I wrap a body,
  and lie in the coffin,


  It is dark here under ground&#8212;it is not evil or pain 
  here&#8212;it is blank here, for reasons.




  It seems to me that everything in the light and air 
  ought to be happy,


  Whoever is not in his coffin and the dark grave, let 
  him know he has enough.




5


  I see a beautiful gigantic swimmer, swimming naked 
  through the eddies of the sea,


  His brown hair lies close and even to his head&#8212;he 
  strikes out with courageous arms&#8212;he urges 
  himself with his legs,

I see his white body&#8212;I see his undaunted eyes,

  I hate the swift-running eddies that would dash him 
  head-foremost on the rocks.



What are you doing, you ruffianly red-trickled waves?

  Will you kill the courageous giant? Will you kill him 
  in the prime of his middle age?






Steady and long he struggles,

  He is baffled, bang'd, bruis'd&#8212;he holds out while his 
  strength holds out,


  The slapping eddies are spotted with his blood&#8212;they 
  bear him away&#8212;they roll him, swing him, turn 
  him,


  His beautiful body is borne in the circling eddies, it is 
  continually bruis'd on rocks,

Swiftly and out of sight is borne the brave corpse.



6

I turn, but do not extricate myself,

  Confused, a past-reading, another, but with darkness 
  yet.




  The beach is cut by the razory ice-wind&#8212;the wreck-
  guns sound,


  The tempest lulls&#8212;the moon comes floundering 
  through the drifts.




  I look where the ship helplessly heads end on&#8212;I 
  hear the burst as she strikes&#8212;I hear the howls 
  of dismay&#8212;they grow fainter and fainter.



I cannot aid with my wringing fingers,

  I can but rush to the surf, and let it drench me and 
  freeze upon me.




  I search with the crowd&#8212;not one of the company is 
  wash'd to us alive; 


  In the morning I help pick up the dead and lay them 
  in rows in a barn.




7

Now of the old war-days, the defeat at Brooklyn,

  Washington stands inside the lines&#8212;he stands on the 
  intrench'd hills, amid a crowd of officers,





  His face is cold and damp&#8212;he cannot repress the 
  weeping drops,


  He lifts the glass perpetually to his eyes&#8212;the color is 
  blanch'd from his cheeks,


  He sees the slaughter of the southern braves confided 
  to him by their parents.



The same, at last and at last, when peace is declared,

  He stands in the room of the old tavern&#8212;the well-
  beloved soldiers all pass through,


  The officers speechless and slow draw near in their 
  turns,


  The chief encircles their necks with his arm, and 
  kisses them on the cheek,


  He kisses lightly the wet cheeks one after another&#8212; 
  he shakes hands, and bids good-by to the army.






8


  Now I tell what my mother told me to-day as we 
  sat at dinner together,


  Of when she was a nearly grown girl, living home 
  with her parents on the old homestead.




  A red squaw came one breakfast-time to the old 
  homestead,


  On her back she carried a bundle of rushes for rush-
  bottoming chairs,


  Her hair, straight, shiny, coarse, black, profuse, half-
  envelop'd her face,


  Her step was free and elastic, and her voice sounded 
  exquisitely as she spoke.




  My mother look'd in delight and amazement at the 
  stranger,


  She look'd at the freshness of her tall-borne face, and 
  full and pliant limbs,

The more she look'd upon her, she loved her,




  Never before had she seen such wonderful beauty and 
  purity,


  She made her sit on a bench by the jamb of the fire-
  place&#8212;she cook'd food for her,


  She had no work to give her, but she gave her re-
  membrance and fondness.




  The red squaw staid all the forenoon, and toward 
  the middle of the afternoon she went away,

O my mother was loth to have her go away!

  All the week she thought of her&#8212;she watch'd for her 
  many a month,


  She remember'd her many a winter and many a 
  summer,


  But the squaw never came, nor was heard of there 
  again.




9


  Now Lucifer was not dead&#8212;or if he was, I am his 
  sorrowful terrible heir; 


  I have been wrong'd&#8212;I am oppress'd&#8212;I hate him 
  that oppresses me,

I will either destroy him, or he shall release me.


Damn him! how he does defile me!

  How he informs against my brother and sister, and 
  takes pay for their blood!


  How he laughs when I look down the bend, after the 
  steamboat that carries away my woman!




  Now the vast dusk bulk that is the whale's bulk, it 
  seems mine; 


  Warily, sportsman! though I lie so sleepy and slug-
  gish, the tap of my flukes is death.




10


  A show of the summer softness! a contact of some-
  thing unseen! an amour of the light and air!




I am jealous, and overwhelm'd with friendliness,
And will go gallivant with the light and air myself,

  And have an unseen something to be in contact with 
  them also.




  O love and summer! you are in the dreams, and in 
  me!


  Autumn and winter are in the dreams&#8212;the farmer 
  goes with his thrift,


  The droves and crops increase, and the barns are well-
  fill'd.




  Elements merge in the night&#8212;ships make tacks in 
  the dreams,

The sailor sails&#8212;the exile returns home,

  The fugitive returns unharm'd&#8212;the immigrant is 
  back beyond months and years,


  The poor Irishman lives in the simple house of his 
  childhood, with the well-known neighbors and 
  faces,


  They warmly welcome him&#8212;he is barefoot again, he 
  forgets he is well off; 


  The Dutchman voyages home, and the Scotchman and 
  Welshman voyage home, and the native of the 
  Mediterranean voyages home,


  To every port of England, France, Spain, enter well-
  fill'd ships,


  The Swiss foots it to toward his hills&#8212;the Prussian goes 
  his way, the Hungarian his way, and the Pole 
  his way,


  The Swede returns, and the Dane and Norwegian re-
  turn.




11

The homeward bound, and the outward bound,

  The beautiful lost swimmer, the ennuy&#233;, the onanist,
  the female that loves unrequited, the money-
  maker,





  The actor and actress, those through with their parts 
  and those waiting to commence,


  The affectionate boy, the husband and wife, the voter,
  the nominee that is chosen, and the nominee 
  that has fail'd,


  The great already known, and the great any time 
  after to-day,


  The stammerer, the sick, the perfect-form'd, the 
  homely,


  The criminal that stood in the box, the judge that 
  sat and sentenced him, the fluent lawyers, the 
  jury, the audience,


  The laugher and weeper, the dancer, the midnight 
  widow, the red squaw,


  The consumptive, the erysipelite, the idiot, he that is 
  wrong'd,


  The antipodes, and every one between this and them 
  in the dark,


  I swear they are averaged now&#8212;one is no better than 
  the other,


  The night and sleep have liken'd them and restored 
  them.



I swear they are all beautiful;

  Every one that sleeps is beautiful&#8212;everything in the 
  dim light is beautiful,

The wi1dest and bloodiest is over, and all is peace.


Peace is always beautiful,
The myth of heaven indicates peace and night.


The myth of heaven indicates the Soul;

  The Soul is always beautiful&#8212;it appears more or it 
  appears less&#8212;it comes, or it lags behind,


  It comes from its embower'd garden, and looks 
  pleasantly on itself, and encloses the world,


  Perfect and clean the genitals previously jetting, and 
  perfect and clean the womb cohering,





  The head well-grown, proportion'd and plumb, and 
  the bowels and joints proportion'd and plumb.



The Soul is always beautiful,

  The universe is duly in order, everything is in its 
  place,


  What has arrived is in its place, and what waits is in    
  its place; 


  The twisted skull waits, the watery or rotten blood 
  waits,


  The child of the glutton or venerealee waits long, and 
  the child of the drunkard waits long, and the 
  drunkard himself waits long,


  The sleepers that lived and died wait&#8212;the far ad-
  vanced are to go on in their turns, and the far 
  behind are to come on in their turns,


  The diverse shall be no less diverse, but they shall 
  flow and unite&#8212;they unite now.




12

The sleepers are very beautiful as they lie unclothed,

  They flow hand in hand over the whole earth, from 
  east to west, as they lie unclothed,


  The Asiatic and African are hand in hand&#8212;the Eu-
  ropean and American are hand in hand,


  Learn'd and unlearn'd are hand in hand, and male 
  and female are hand in hand,


  The bare arm of the girl crosses the bare breast of 
  her lover&#8212;they press close without lust&#8212;his 
  lips press her neck,


  The father holds his grown or ungrown son in his 
  arms with measureless love, and the son holds 
  the father in his arms with measureless love,


  The white hair of the mother shines on the white 
  wrist of the daughter,


  The breath of the boy goes with the breath of the 
  man, friend is inarm'd by friend,


  The scholar kisses the teacher, and the teacher kisses 
  the scholar&#8212;the wrong'd is made right,





  The call of the slave is one with the master's call, and 
  the master salutes the slave,


  The felon steps forth from the prison&#8212;the insane 
  becomes sane&#8212;the suffering of sick persons is 
  reliev'd,


  The sweatings and fevers stop&#8212;the throat that was 
  unsound is sound&#8212;the lungs of the consump-
  tive are resumed&#8212;the poor distres't head is 
  free,


  The joints of the rheumatic move as smoothly as ever,
  and smoother than ever,


  Stiflings and passages open&#8212;the paralyzed become 
  supple,


  The swell'd and convuls'd and congested awake to 
  themselves in condition,


  They pass the invigoration of the night, and the 
  chemistry of the night, and awake.




13

I too pass from the night,

  I stay a while away, O night, but I return to you 
  again, and love you.



Why should I be afraid to trust myself to you?

  I am not afraid&#8212;I have been well brought forward by 
  you; 


  I love the rich running day, but I do not desert her 
  in whom I lay so long.


  I know not how I came of you, and I know not where 
  I go with you&#8212;but I know I came well, and 
  shall go well.




  I will stop only a time with the night, and rise be-
  times; 


  I will duly pass the day, O my mother, and duly 
  return to you.









ELEMENTAL DRIFTS.

1

ELEMENTAL drifts!

  O I wish I could impress others as you and the waves 
  have just been impressing me.



As I ebb'd with an ebb of the ocean of life,
As I wended the shores I know,

  As I walk'd where the sea-ripples wash you, Pau-
  manok,

Where they rustle up, hoarse and sibilant,

  Where the fierce old mother endlessly cries for her 
  castaways,


  I, musing, late in the autumn day, gazing off south-
  ward,


  Alone, held by this eternal self of me, out of the pride 
  of which I have utter'd my poems,


  Was seiz'd by the spirit that trails in the lines under-
  foot,


  In the rim, the sediment, that stands for all the water 
  and all the land of the globe.




  Fascinated, my eyes, reverting from the south,
  drop't, to follow those slender winrows,


  Chaff, straw, splinters of wood, weeds, and the sea-
  gluten,


  Scum, scales from shining rocks, leaves of salt-lettuce,
  left by the tide; 


  Miles walking, the sound of breaking waves the other 
  side of me,


  Paumanok, there and then, as I thought the old 
  thought of likenesses,




These you presented to me, you fish-shaped island,
As I wended the shores I know,

  As I walk'd with that eternal self of me, seeking 
  types.




2

As I wend to the shores I know not,

  As I list to the dirge, the voices of men and women 
  wreck't,


  As I inhale the impalpable breezes that set in upon 
  me,


  As the ocean so mysterious rolls toward me closer 
  and closer,


  I, too, but signify, at the utmost, a little wash'd-up 
  drift,

A few sands and dead leaves to gather,

  Gather, and merge myself as part of the sands and 
  drift.



O baffled, balk'd, bent to the very earth,

  Opprest with myself that I have dared to open my 
  mouth,


  Aware now, that, amid all the blab whose echoes re-
  coil upon me, I have not once had the least 
  idea who or what I am,


  But that before all my insolent poems, the real ME 
  stands yet untouch'd, untold, altogether un-
  reach'd,


  Withdrawn far, mocking me with mock-congratu-
  latory signs and bows,


  With peals of distant ironical laughter at every word 
  I have written,


  Pointing in silence to all these songs, and then to 
  the sand beneath.




  Now I perceive I have not understood anything&#8212; 
  not a single object&#8212;and that no man ever 
  can.







  I perceive Nature, here in sight of the sea, is taking 
  advantage of me, to dart upon me, and sting 
  me,


  Because I have dared to open my mouth to sing at 
  all.




3

You oceans both! I close with you;
These little shreds shall, indeed, stand for all.


You friable shore, with trails of debris!
You fish-shaped island! I take what is underfoot;
What is yours is mine, my father.


I too Paumanok,

  I too have bubbled up, floated the measureless float,
  and been wash'd on your shores; 

I too am but a trail of drift and debris,

  I too leave little wrecks upon you, you fish-shaped 
  island.



I throw myself upon your breast, my father,
I cling to you so that you cannot unloose me,
I hold you so firm, till you answer me something.


Kiss me, my father,
Touch me with your lips, as I touch those I love,

  Breathe to me, while I hold you close, the secret of 
  the wondrous murmuring I envy.




4

Ebb, ocean of life, (the flow will return,)
Cease not your moaning, you fierce old mother,

  Endlessly cry for your castaways&#8212;but fear not, deny 
  not me,


  Rustle not up so hoarse and angry against my feet, as 
  I touch you, or gather from you.






I mean tenderly by you,

  I gather for myself, and for this phantom, looking 
  down where we lead, and following me and 
  mine.



Me and mine!
We, loose winrows, little corpses,
Froth, snowy white, and bubbles,
(See! from my dead lips the ooze exuding at last!
See&#8212;the prismatic colors, glistening and rolling!)
Tufts of straw, sands, fragments,

  Buoy'd hither from many moods, one contradicting 
  another,


  From the storm, the long calm, the darkness, the 
  swell; 


  Musing, pondering, a breath, a briny tear, a dab of 
  liquid or soil; 


  Up just as much out of fathomless workings fer-
  mented and thrown; 


  A limp blossom or two, torn, just as much over waves 
  floating, drifted at random; 

Just as much for us that sobbing dirge of Nature;

  Just as much, whence we come, that blare of the 
  cloud-trumpets; 


  We, capricious, brought hither, we know not whence,
  spread out before you,

You, up there, walking or sitting,
Whoever you are&#8212;we too lie in drifts at your feet.








MIRACLES.


WHAT shall I give? and which are my miracles?


Realism is mine&#8212;my miracles&#8212;Take freely,

  Take without end&#8212;I offer them to you wherever your 
  feet can carry you, or your eyes reach.



Why! who makes much of a miracle?
As to me, I know of nothing else but miracles,
Whether I walk the streets of Manhattan,

  Or dart my sight over the roofs of houses toward the 
  sky,


  Or wade with naked feet along the beach, just in the 
  edge of the water,

Or stand under trees in the woods,

  Or talk by day with any one I love&#8212;or sleep in the 
  bed at night with any one I love,

Or sit at the table at dinner with my mother,
Or look at strangers opposite me riding in the car,

  Or watch honey-bees busy around the hive, of a sum-
  mer forenoon,

Or animals feeding in the fields,
Or birds&#8212;or the wonderfulness of insects in the air,

  Or the wonderfulness of the sun-down&#8212;or of stars 
  shining so quiet and bright,


  Or the exquisite, delicate, thin curve of the new-moon 
  in spring; 


  Or whether I go among those I like best, and that 
  like me best&#8212;mechanics, boatmen, farmers,


  Or among the savans&#8212;or to the soiree&#8212;or to the 
  opera,


  Or stand a long while looking at the movements of 
  machinery,

Or behold children at their sports,

  Or the admirable sight of the perfect old man, or the 
  perfect old woman,




Or the sick in hospitals, or the dead carried to burial,
Or my own eyes and figure in the glass;
These, with the rest, one and all, are to me miracles,

  The whole referring&#8212;yet each distinct and in its 
  place.




  To me, every hour of the light and dark is a 
  miracle,

Every inch of space is a miracle,

  Every square yard of the surface of the earth is spread 
  with the same,

Every cubic foot of the interior swarms with the same;

  Every spear of grass&#8212;the frames, limbs, organs, of 
  men and women, and all that concerns them,

All these to me are unspeakably perfect miracles.


To me the sea is a continual miracle;

  The fishes that swim&#8212;the rocks&#8212;the motion of the 
  waves&#8212;the ships, with men in them,

What stranger miracles are there?






YOU FELONS ON TRIAL IN COURTS.

You felons on trial in courts;

  You convicts in prison-cells&#8212;you sentenced assassins,
  chain'd and hand-cuff'd with iron; 

Who am I, too, that I am not on trial, or in prison?

  Me, ruthless and devilish as any, that my wrists are 
  not chain'd with iron, or my ankles with iron?




  You prostitutes flaunting over the trottoirs, or ob-
  scene in your rooms,


  Who am I, that I should call you more obscene than 
  myself?






O culpable! O traitor!
I acknowledge&#8212;I expos&#233;!

  (O admirers! praise not me! compliment not me! you 
  make me wince,

I see what you do not&#8212;I know what you do not;)
Inside these breast-bones I lie smutch'd and choked;

  Beneath this face that appears so impassive, hell's 
  tides continually run; 

Lusts and wickedness are acceptable to me;
I walk with delinquents with passionate love;

  I feel I am of them&#8212;I belong to those convicts and 
  prostitutes myself,


  And henceforth I will not deny them&#8212;for how can I 
  deny myself?





MEDIUMS.

THEY shall arise in the States;

  They shall report Nature, laws, physiology, and happi-
  ness; 

They shall illustrate Democracy and the kosmos;
They shall be alimentive, amative, perceptive;

  They shall be complete women and men&#8212;their pose 
  brawny and supple, their drink water, their 
  blood clean and clear; 


  They shall enjoy materialism and the sight of products 
  &#8212;they shall enjoy the sight of the beef, lumber,
  bread-stuffs, of Chicago, the great city; 


  They shall train themselves to go in public to become 
  orators and oratresses; 


  Strong and sweet shall their tongues be&#8212;poems and 
  materials of poems shall come from their lives 
  &#8212;they shall be makers and finders; 


  Of them, and of their works, shall emerge divine 
  conveyers, to convey gospels; 





  Characters, events, retrospections, shall be convey'd 
  in gospels&#8212;Trees, animals, waters, shall be 
  convey'd,


  Death, the future, the invisible faith, shall all be con-
  vey'd.



NOW LIFT ME CLOSE.
 Now lift me close to your face till I whisper,

  What you are holding is in reality no book, nor part 
  of a book; 

It is a man, flush'd and full-blooded&#8212;it is I&#8212;So long!

  &#8212;We must separate awhile&#8212;Here! take from my lips 
  this kiss; 

Whoever you are, I give it especially to you;

So long!&#8212;And I hope we shall meet again.

FINIS.








WALT WHITMAN'S 
DRUM-TAPS.

New-York.
1865. 






ENTERED according to act of Congress, in the year 1865, by WALT WHITMAN, in the Clerk's Office of the United States District Court of the Southern District of New York.





CONTENTS.


      
    Drum-Taps............................................
 5


Shut not your doors to me proud Libraries............
 8


Cavalry crossing a ford..............................
 8


Song of the Banner at Day-Break......................
 9


By the bivouac's fitful flame........................
 16


1861.................................................
 17


From Paumanok starting I fly like a bird.............
 18


Beginning my studies.................................
 18


The Centenarian's Story..............................
 19


Pioneers! O Pioneers!................................
 25


Quicksand years that whirl me I know not whither.....
 30


The Dresser..........................................
 31


When I heard the learn'd Astronomer..................
 34


Rise O Days from your fathomless deeps...............
 35


A child's amaze......................................
 37


Beat! beat! drums!.................................
 38


Come up from the fields, father......................
 39


City of ships........................................
 41


Mother and babe......................................
 41


Vigil strange I kept on the field one night...........
 42


Bathed in war's perfume..............................
 43


A march in the ranks hard-prest, and the road unknown
 44


Long, too long, O land...............................
 45


A sight in camp in the day-break grey and dim........
 46


A farm picture.......................................
 46


Give me the splendid silent sun......................
 47


Over the carnage rose prophetic a voice..............
 49


Did you ask dulcet rhymes from me?...................
 50


Year of meteors......................................
 51


The Torch............................................
 52


Years of the unperform'd.............................
 53


Year that trembled and reel'd beneath me.............
 54


The Veteran's vision.................................
 55


O tan-faced Prairie-boy..............................
 56









Camps of green..........................................
 57


As toilsome I wander'd Virginia's woods.................
 58


Hymn of dead soldiers...................................
 59


The ship................................................
 60


A Broadway pageant......................................
 61


Flag of stars, thick-sprinkled bunting..................
 65


Old Ireland.............................................
 66


Look down fair moon.....................................
 66


Out of the rolling ocean, the crowd.....................
 67


World, take good notice.................................
 67


I saw old General at bay................................
 68


Others may praise what they like........................
 68


Solid, ironical, rolling orb............................
 68


Hush'd be the camps to-day..............................
 69


Weave in, weave in, my hardy soul........................
 69


Turn, O Libertad........................................
 70


Bivouac on a mountain side..............................
 70


Pensive on her dead gazing, I heard the mother of all...
 71


Not youth pertains to me................................
 72










DRUM-TAPS.


FIRST, O songs, for a prelude,

  Lightly strike on the stretch'd tympanum, pride and joy 
  in my city,

How she led the rest to arms&#8212;how she gave the cue,

  How at once with lithe limbs, unwaiting a moment, she 
  sprang; 

(O superb! O Manhattan, my own, my peerless!

  O strongest you in the hour of danger, in crisis! O 
  truer than steel!)


  How you sprang! how you threw off the costumes of 
  peace with indifferent hand; 


  How your soft opera-music changed, and the drum and 
  fife were heard in their stead; 


  How you led to the war, (that shall serve for our pre-
  lude, songs of soldiers,)

How Manhattan drum-taps led.


Forty years had I in my city seen soldiers parading;

  Forty years as a pageant&#8212;till unawares, the Lady of 
  this teeming and turbulent city,


  Sleepless, amid her ships, her houses, her incalculable 
  wealth,

With her million children around her&#8212;suddenly,
At dead of night, at news from the south,
Incens'd, struck with clench'd hand the pavement.


A shock electric&#8212;the night sustain'd it;

  Till with ominous hum, our hive at day-break, pour'd 
  out its myriads.







  From the houses then, and the workshops, and 
  through all the doorways,

Leapt they tumultuous&#8212;and lo! Manhattan arming.


To the drum-taps prompt,
The young men falling in and arming;

  The mechanics arming, (the trowel, the jack-plane, the 
  blacksmith's hammer, tost aside with precipi-
  tation;)


  The lawyer leaving his office, and arming&#8212;the judge 
  leaving the court; 


  The driver deserting his wagon in the street, jumping 
  down, throwing the reins abruptly down on the 
  horses' backs; 


  The salesman leaving the store&#8212;the boss, book-keeper,
  porter, all leaving; 


  Squads gathering everywhere by common consent, and 
  arming; 


  The new recruits, even boys&#8212;the old men show them 
  how to wear their accoutrements&#8212;they buckle 
  the straps carefully; 


  Outdoors arming&#8212;indoors arming&#8212;the flash of the 
  musket-barrels; 


  The white tents cluster in camps&#8212;the arm'd sentries 
  around&#8212;the sunrise cannon, and again at sunset; 


  Arm'd regiments arrive every day, pass through the 
  city, and embark from the wharves; 


  (How good they look, as they tramp down to the river,
  sweaty, with their guns on their shoulders!


  How I love them! how I could hug them, with their 
  brown faces, and their clothes and knapsacks cov-
  er'd with dust!)


  The blood of the city up&#8212;arm'd! arm'd! the cry 
  everywhere; 


  The flags flung out from the steeples of churches, and 
  from all the public buildings and stores; 


  The tearful parting&#8212;the mother kisses her son&#8212;the 
  son kisses his mother; 


  (Loth is the mother to part&#8212;yet not a word does she 
  speak to detain him;)





  The tumultuous escort&#8212;the ranks of policemen preceed-
  ing, clearing the way; 


  The unpent enthusiasm&#8212;the wild cheers of the crowd 
  for their favorites; 


  The artillery&#8212;the silent cannons, bright as gold, drawn 
  along, rumble lightly over the stones; 

(Silent cannons&#8212;soon to cease your silence!
Soon, unlimber'd, to begin the red business;)

  All the mutter of preparation&#8212;all the determin'd 
  arming; 


  The hospital service&#8212;the lint, bandages, and medi-
  cines; 


  The women volunteering for nurses&#8212;the work begun 
  for, in earnest&#8212;no mere parade now; 


  War! an arm'd race is advancing!&#8212;the welcome for 
  battle&#8212;no turning away; 


  War! be it weeks, months, or years&#8212;an arm'd race is 
  advancing to welcome it.



Mannahatta a-march!&#8212;and it's O to sing it well!
It's O for a manly life in the camp!


And the sturdy artillery!

  The guns, bright as gold&#8212;the work for giants&#8212;to 
  serve well the guns: 


  Unlimber them! no more, as the past forty years, for 
  salutes for courtesies merely; 

Put in something else now besides powder and wadding.


And you, Lady of Ships! you Mannahatta!

  Old matron of the city! this proud, friendly, turbulent 
  city!


  Often in peace and wealth you were pensive, or covertly 
  frown'd amid all your children; 

But now you smile with joy, exulting old Mannahatta!







SHUT NOT YOUR DOORS TO ME PROUD LIBRARIES.

SHUT not your doors to me, proud libraries,

  For that which was lacking among you all, yet needed 
  most, I bring; 

A book I have made for your dear sake, O soldiers,
And for you, O soul of man, and you, love of comrades;

  The words of my book nothing, the life of it every-
  thing; 


  A book separate, not link'd with the rest, nor felt by 
  the intellect; 


  But you will feel every word, O Libertad! arm'd 
  Libertad!

It shall pass by the intellect to swim the sea, the air,
With joy with you, O soul of man.



CAVALRY CROSSING A FORD.

  A LINE in long array, where they wind betwixt green 
  islands; 


  They take a serpentine course&#8212;their arms flash in the 
  sun&#8212;Hark to the musical clank; 


  Behold the silvery river&#8212;in it the splashing horses,
  loitering, stop to drink; 


  Behold the brown-faced men&#8212;each group, each person,
  a picture&#8212;the negligent rest on the saddles; 


  Some emerge on the opposite bank&#8212;others are just 
  entering the ford; 

The guidon flags flutter gaily in the wind.






SONG OF THE BANNER AT DAY-BREAK.

POET.

O A new song, a free song,

  Flapping, flapping, flapping, flapping, by sounds, by 
  voices clearer,

By the wind's voice and that of the drum,

  By the banner's voice, and child's voice, and sea's voice,
  and father's voice,

Low on the ground and high in the air,
On the ground where father and child stand,
In the upward air where their eyes turn,
Where the banner at day-break is flapping.


Words! book-words! what are you?
Words no more, for hearken and see,
My song is there in the open air&#8212;and I must sing,
With the banner and pennant a-flapping.


I'll weave the chord and twine in,

  Man's desire and babe's desire&#8212;I'll twine them in, I'll 
  put in life; 


  I'll put the bayonet's flashing point&#8212;I'll let bullets and 
  slugs whizz; 


  I'll pour the verse with streams of blood, full of volition,
  full of joy; 

Then loosen, launch forth, to go and compete,
With the banner and pennant a-flapping.






BANNER AND PENNANT.

Come up here, bard, bard;
Come up here, soul, soul;
Come up here, dear little child,

  To fly in the clouds and winds with us, and play with 
  the measureless light.




CHILD.


  Father, what is that in the sky beckoning to me with 
  long finger?

And what does it say to me all the while?



FATHER.

Nothing, my babe, you see in the sky;

  And nothing at all to you it says. But look you, my 
  babe,


  Look at these dazzling things in the houses, and see you 
  the money-shops opening; 


  And see you the vehicles preparing to crawl along the 
  streets with goods: 

These! ah, these! how valued and toil'd for, these!
How envied by all the earth!





POET.

Fresh and rosy red, the sun is mounting high;

  On floats the sea in distant blue, careering through its 
  channels; 


  On floats the wind over the breast of the sea, setting in 
  toward land; 

The great steady wind from west and west-by-south,
Floating so buoyant, with milk-white foam on the waters.


But I am not the sea, nor the red sun;
I am not the wind, with girlish laughter;

  Not the immense wind which strengthens&#8212;not the 
  wind which lashes; 


  Not the spirit that ever lashes its own body to terror and 
  death: 





  But I am of that which unseen comes and sings, sings,
  sings,

        
  Which babbles in brooks and scoots in showers on the 
  land; 


  Which the birds know in the woods, mornings and 
  evenings,


  And the shore-sands know, and the hissing wave, and 
  that banner and pennant,

Aloft there flapping and flapping.



CHILD.


  O father, it is alive&#8212;it is full of people&#8212;it has 
  children!

O now it seems to me it is talking to its children!
I hear it&#8212;it talks to me&#8212;O it is wonderful!

  O it stretches&#8212;it spreads and runs so fast! O my 
  father,

It is so broad, it covers the whole sky!



FATHER.

Cease, cease, my foolish babe,

  What you are saying is sorrowful to me&#8212;much it dis-
  pleases me; 


  Behold with the rest, again I say&#8212;behold not banners 
  and pennants aloft; 


  But the well-prepared pavements behold&#8212;and mark 
  the solid-wall'd houses.




BANNER AND PENNANT.

Speak to the child, O bard, out of Manhattan;

  Speak to our children all, or north or south of Manhat-
  tan,


  Where our factory-engines hum, where our miners 
  delve the ground,


  Where our hoarse Niagara rumbles, where our prairie-
  plows are plowing; 


  Speak, O bard! point this day, leaving all the rest, to 
  us over all&#8212;and yet we know not why; 

For what are we, mere strips of cloth, profiting nothing,
Only flapping in the wind?






POET.

I hear and see not strips of cloth alone;

  I hear the tramp of armies, I hear the challenging 
  sentry; 


  I hear the jubilant shouts of millions of men&#8212;I hear 
  LIBERTY!

I hear the drums beat, and the trumpets blowing;
I myself move abroad, swift-rising, flying then;

  I use the wings of the land-bird, and use the wings of 
  the sea-bird, and look down as from a height; 


  I do not deny the precious results of peace&#8212;I see pop-
  ulous cities, with wealth incalculable; 


  I see numberless farms&#8212;I see the farmers working in 
  their fields or barns; 


  I see mechanics working&#8212;I see buildings everywhere 
  founded, going up, or finish'd; 


  I see trains of cars swiftly speeding along railroad 
  tracks, drawn by the locomotives; 


  I see the stores, depots, of Boston, Baltimore, Charles-
  ton, New Orleans; 


  I see far in the west the immense area of grain&#8212;I 
  dwell awhile, hovering; 


  I pass to the lumber forests of the north, and again 
  to the southern plantation, and again to Cali-
  fornia; 


  Sweeping the whole, I see the countless profit, the 
  busy gatherings, earned wages; 


  See the identity formed out of thirty-six spacious and 
  haughty States, (and many more to come;)


  See forts on the shores of harbors&#8212;see ships sailing in 
  and out; 


  Then over all, (aye! aye!) my little and lengthen'd pen-
  nant shaped like a sword,


  Runs swiftly up, indicating war and defiance&#8212;And now 
  the halyards have rais'd it,


  Side of my banner broad and blue&#8212;side of my starry 
  banner,

Discarding peace over all the sea and land.






BANNER AND PENNANT.


  Yet louder, higher, stronger, bard! yet farther,
  wider cleave!


  No longer let our children deem us riches and peace 
  alone; 

We can be terror and carnage also, and are so now;

  Not now are we one of these spacious and haughty 
  States, (nor any five, nor ten;)


  Nor market nor depot are we, nor money-bank in the 
  city; 


  But these, and all, and the brown and spreading land,
  and the mines below, are ours; 


  And the shores of the sea are ours, and the rivers great 
  and small; 


  And the fields they moisten are ours, and the crops and 
  the fruits are ours; 


  Bays and channels, and ships sailing in and out, are ours 
  &#8212;and we over all,


  Over the area spread below, the three millions of square 
  miles&#8212;the capitals,


  The thirty-five millions of people&#8212;O bard! in life and 
  death supreme,


  We, even we, from this day flaunt out masterful, high 
  up above,


  Not for the present alone, for a thousand years, chant-
  ing through you,

This song to the soul of one poor little child.



CHILD.

O my father, I like not the houses;

  They will never to me be anything&#8212;nor do I like 
  money; 


  But to mount up there I would like, O father dear&#8212; 
  that banner I like; 

That pennant I would be, and must be.



FATHER.

Child of mine, you fill me with anguish;
To be that pennant would be too fearful;




  Little you know what it is this day, and henceforth 
  forever; 

It is to gain nothing, but risk and defy everything;

  Forward to stand in front of wars&#8212;and O, such wars!
  &#8212;what have you to do with them?

With passions of demons, slaughter, premature death?



POET.

Demons and death then I sing;

  Put in all, aye all, will I&#8212;sword-shaped pennant for 
  war, and banner so broad and blue,


  And a pleasure new and extatic, and the prattled yearn-
  ing of children,


  Blent with the sounds of the peaceful land, and the 
  liquid wash of the sea; 


  And the icy cool of the far, far north, with rustling 
  cedars and pines; 


  And the whirr of drums, and the sound of soldiers 
  marching, and the hot sun shining south; 


  And the beach-waves combing over the beach on my 
  eastern shore, and my western shore the same; 


  And all between those shores, and my ever running 
  Mississippi, with bends and chutes; 


  And my Illinois fields, and my Kansas fields, and my 
  fields of Missouri; 


  The CONTINENT&#8212;devoting the whole identity, without 
  reserving an atom,


  Pour in! whelm that which asks, which sings, with all,
  and the yield of all.




BANNER AND PENNANT.

Aye all! for ever, for all!
From sea to sea, north and south, east and west,
Fusing and holding, claiming, devouring the whole;
No more with tender lip, nor musical labial sound,

  But, out of the night emerging for good, our voice per-
  suasive no more,

Croaking like crows here in the wind.






POET. (Finale.)

My limbs, my veins dilate;

  The blood of the world has fill'd me full&#8212;my theme is 
  clear at last : 


  &#8212;Banner so broad, advancing out of the night, I sing 
  you haughty and resolute; 


  I burst through where I waited long, too long, deafen'd 
  and blinded; 


  My sight, my hearing and tongue, are come to me, (a 
  little child taught me;)


  I hear from above, O pennant of war, your ironical call 
  and demand; 


  Insensate! insensate! (yet I at any rate chant you,) O 
  banner!


  Not houses of peace are you, nor any nor all their pros-
  perity, (if need be, you shall have every one of 
  those houses to destroy them; 


  You thought not to destroy those valuable houses, stand-
  ing fast, full of comfort, built with money; 


  May they stand fast, then? Not an hour, unless you,
  above them and all, stand fast;)


  &#8212;O banner! not money so precious are you, nor farm 
  produce you, nor the material good nutriment,


  Nor excellent stores, nor landed on wharves from the 
  ships; 


  Not the superb ships, with sail-power or steam-power,
  fetching and carrying cargoes,


  Nor machinery, vehicles, trade, nor revenues,&#8212;But 
  you, as henceforth I see you,


  Running up out of the night, bringing your cluster of 
  stars, (ever-enlarging stars;)


  Divider of day-break you, cutting the air, touch'd by 
  the sun, measuring the sky,


  (Passionately seen and yearn'd for by one poor little 
  child,


  While others remain busy, or smartly talking, forever 
  teaching thrift, thrift;)


  O you up there! O pennant! where you undulate like 
  a snake, hissing so curious,





  Out of reach&#8212;an idea only&#8212;yet furiously fought for,
  risking bloody death&#8212;loved by me!


  So loved! O you banner leading the day, with stars 
  brought from the night!


  Valueless, object of eyes, over all and demanding all&#8212; 
  O banner and pennant!


  I too leave the rest&#8212;great as it is, it is nothing&#8212; 
  houses, machines are nothing&#8212;I see them not; 


  I see but you, O warlike pennant! O banner so broad,
  with stripes, I sing you only,

Flapping up there in the wind.





BY THE BIVOUAC'S FITFUL FLAME.
By the bivouac's fitful flame,

  A procession winding around me, solemn and sweet and 
  slow;&#8212;but first I note,


  The tents of the sleeping army, the fields' and woods' 
  dim outline,

The darkness, lit spots of kindled fire&#8212;the silence;
Like a phantom far or near an occasional figure moving;

  The shrubs and trees, (as I left my eyes they seem to be 
  stealthily watching me;)


  While wind in procession thoughts, O tender and 
  wond'rous thoughts,


  Of life and death&#8212;of home and the past and loved,
  and of those that are far away; 


  A solemn and slow procession there as I sit on the 
  ground,

By the bivouac's fitful flame.






1861.

ARM'D year! year of the struggle!

  No dainty rhymes or sentimental love verses for you,
  terrible year!


  Not you as some pale poetling, seated at a desk, lisp-
  ing cadenzas piano; 


  But as a strong man, erect, clothed in blue clothes,
  advancing, carrying a rifle on your shoulder,


  With well-gristled body and sunburnt face and hands&#8212; 
  with a knife in the belt at your side,


  As I heard you shouting loud&#8212;your sonorous voice 
  ringing across the continent; 


  Your masculine voice, O year, as rising amid the great 
  cities,


  Amid the men of Manhattan I saw you, as one of the 
  workmen, the dwellers in Manhattan; 


  Or with large steps crossing the prairies out of Illinois 
  and Indiana,


  Rapidly crossing the West with springy gait, and de-
  scending the Alleghanies; 


  Or down from the great lakes, or in Pennsylvania, or on 
  deck along the Ohio river; 


  Or southward along the Tennessee or Cumberland rivers,
  or at Chattanooga on the mountain top,


  Saw I your gait and saw I your sinewy limbs, clothed 
  in blue, bearing weapons, robust year; 


  Heard your determin'd voice, launch'd forth again and 
  again; 


  Year that suddenly sang by the mouths of the round 
  lipp'd cannon,

I repeat you, hurrying, crashing, sad, distracted year.






FROM PAUMANOK STARTING I FLY LIKE A BIRD.

FROM Paumanok starting, I fly like a bird,
Around and around to soar, to sing the idea of all;
To the north betaking myself, to sing there arctic songs,

  To Kanada, 'till I absorb Kanada in myself&#8212;to Michi-
  gan then,


  To Wisconsin, Iowa, Minnesota, to sing their songs,
  (they are inimitable;)


  Then to Ohio and Indiana to sing theirs&#8212;to Missouri 
  and Kansas and Arkansas to sing theirs,


  To Tennessee and Kentucky&#8212;to the Carolinas and 
  Georgia, to sing theirs,


  To Texas, and so along up toward California, to roam 
  accepted everywhere; 

To sing first, (to the tap of the war-drum, if need be,)

  The idea of all&#8212;of the western world, one and insep-
  arable,

And then the song of each member of These States.



BEGINNING MY STUDIES.

BEGINNING my studies, the first step pleas'd me so much,

  The mere fact, consciousness&#8212;these forms&#8212;the pow-
  er of motion,

The least insect or animal&#8212;the senses&#8212;eyesight;
The first step, I say, aw'd me and pleas'd me so much,
I have never gone, and never wish'd to go, any farther,
But stop and loiter all my life, to sing it in extatic songs.






THE CENTENARIAN'S STORY.

VOLUNTEER OF 1861, (At Washington Park, Brooklyn, assisting the Centenarian.)

Give me your hand, old Revolutionary;

  The hill-top is nigh&#8212;but a few steps, (make room,
  gentlemen;)


  Up the path you have follow'd me well, spite of your 
  hundred and extra years; 


  You can walk, old man, though your eyes are almost 
  done; 


  Your faculties serve you, and presently I must have 
  them serve me.



Rest, while I tell what the crowd around us means;
On the plain below, recruits are drilling and exercising;
There is the camp&#8212;one regiment departs to morrow;
Do you hear the officers giving the orders?
Do you hear the clank of the muskets?


Why, what comes over you now, old man?

  Why do you tremble, and clutch my hand so convul-
  sively?


  The troops are but drilling&#8212;they are yet surrounded 
  with smiles; 


  Around them at hand, the well drest friends and the 
  women; 


  While splendid and warm the afternoon sun shines 
  down; 





  Green the midsummer verdure, and fresh blows the dal-
  lying breeze,


  O'er proud and peaceful cities, and arm of the sea be-
  tween.




  But drill and parade are over&#8212;they march back to 
  quarters; 


  Only hear that approval of hands! hear what a clap-
  ping!




  As wending, the crowds now part and disperse&#8212;but 
  we, old man,


  Not for nothing have I brought you hither&#8212;we must 
  remain; 

You to speak in your turn, and I to listen and tell.





THE CENTENARIAN.

When I clutch'd your hand, it was not with terror;
But suddenly, pouring about me here, on every side,

  And below there where the boys were drilling, and up 
  the slopes they ran,


  And where tents are pitch'd, and wherever you see,
  south and south-east and south-west,

Over hills, across lowlands, and in the skirts of woods,

  And along the shores, in mire (now fill'd over,) came 
  again, and suddenly raged,


  As eighty-five years a-gone, no mere parade receiv'd 
  with applause of friends,


  But a battle, which I took part in myself&#8212;aye, long ago 
  as it is, I took part in it,

Walking then this hill-top, this same ground.


Aye, this is the ground;

  My blind eyes, even as I speak, behold it re-peopled 
  from graves: 


  The years recede, pavements and stately houses disap-
  pear: 





  Rude forts appear again, the old hoop'd guns are 
  mounted; 


  I see the lines of rais'd earth stretching from river to 
  bay; 


  I mark the vista of waters, I mark the uplands and 
  slopes: 

Here we lay encamp'd&#8212;it was this time in summer also.



  As I talk, I remember all&#8212;I remember the Declara-
  tion: 


  It was read here&#8212;the whole army paraded&#8212;it was 
  read to us here; 


  By his staff surrounded, the general stood in the mid-
  dle&#8212;he held up his unsheath'd sword,

It glitter'd in the sun in full sight of the army.


'Twas a bold act then;

  The English war ships had just arrived&#8212;the king had 
  sent them from over the sea; 


  We could watch down the lower bay where they lay at 
  anchor,

And the transports, swarming with soldiers.



  A few days more, and they landed&#8212;and then the 
  battle.



Twenty thousand were brought against us,
A veteran force, furnish'd with good artillery.


I tell not now the whole of the battle;

  But one brigade, early in the forenoon, order'd forward 
  to engage the red-coats; 

Of that brigade I tell, and how steadily it march'd,
And how long and how well it stood, confronting death.



  Who do you think that was, marching steadily, stern-
  ly confronting death?


  It was the brigade of the youngest men, two thousand 
  strong,





  Rais'd in Virginia and Maryland, and many of them 
  known personally to the General.




  Jauntily forward they went with quick step toward 
  Gowanus' waters; 


  Till of a sudden, unlook'd for, by defiles through the 
  woods, gain'd at night,


  The British advancing, wedging in from the east,
  fiercely playing their guns,


  That brigade of the youngest was cut off, and at the 
  enemy's mercy.



The General watch'd them from this hill;

  They made repeated desperate attempts to burst their 
  environment; 


  Then drew close together, very compact, their flag 
  flying in the middle; 


  But O from the hills how the cannon were thinning and 
  thinning them!



It sickens me yet, that slaughter!

  I saw the moisture gather in drops on the face of the 
  General; 

I saw how he wrung his hands in anguish.



  Meanwhile the British maneuver'd to draw us out 
  for a pitch'd battle; 

But we dared not trust the chances of a pitch'd battle.


We fought the fight in detachments;

  Sallying forth, we fought at several points&#8212;but in each 
  the luck was against us; 


  Our foe advancing, steadily getting the best of it, push'd 
  us back to the works on this hill; 

Till we turn'd menacing, here, and then he left us.



  That was the going out of the brigade of the young-
  est men, two thousand strong; 

Few return'd&#8212;nearly all remain in Brooklyn.





That, and here, my General's first battle;

  No women looking on, nor sunshine to bask in&#8212;it 
  did not conclude with applause; 

Nobody clapp'd hands here then.



  But in darkness, in mist, on the ground, under a 
  chill rain,

Wearied that night we lay, foil'd and sullen;

  While scornfully laugh'd many an arrogant lord, off 
  against us encamp'd,


  Quite within hearing, feasting, klinking wine-glasses 
  together over their victory.



So, dull and damp and another day;
But the night of that, mist lifting, rain ceasing,

  Silent as a ghost, while they thought they were sure of 
  him, my General retreated.



I saw him at the river-side,

  Down by the ferry, lit by torches, hastening the embar-
  cation; 


  My General waited till the soldiers and wounded were 
  all pass'd over; 


  And then, (it was just ere sunrise,) these eyes rested on 
  him for the last time.



Every one else seem'd fill'd with gloom;
Many no doubt thought of capitulation.


But when my General pass'd me,

  As he stood in his boat, and look'd toward the coming 
  sun,

I saw something different from capitulation.





TERMINUS.

Enough&#8212;the Centenarian's story ends;
The two, the past and present, have interchanged;

  I myself, as connecter, as chansonnier of a great future,
  am now speaking.






And is this the ground Washington trod?

  And these waters I listlessly daily cross, are these the 
  waters he cross'd,


  As resolute in defeat, as other generals in their proudest 
  triumphs?



It is well&#8212;a lesson like that, always comes good;

  I must copy the story, and send it eastward and west-
  ward; 


  I must preserve that look, as it beam'd on you, rivers of 
  Brooklyn.




  See! as the annual round returns, the phantoms 
  return; 

It is the 27th of August, and the British have landed;

  The battle begins, and goes against us&#8212;behold! through 
  the smoke Washington's face; 


  The brigade of Virginia and Maryland have march'd 
  forth to intercept the enemy; 


  They are cut off&#8212;murderous artillery from the hills 
  plays upon them; 


  Rank after rank falls, while over them silently droops 
  the flag,


  Baptized that day in many a young man's bloody 
  wounds,

In death, defeat, and sisters', mothers' tears.



  Ah, hills and slopes of Brooklyn! I perceive you 
  are more valuable than your owners supposed; 


  Ah, river! henceforth you will be illumin'd to me at 
  sunrise with something besides the sun.




  Encampments new! in the midst of you stands an 
  encampment very old; 

Stands forever the camp of the dead brigade.








PIONEERS! O PIONEERS!

1

COME, my tan-faced children,
Follow well in order, get your weapons ready;

  Have you your pistols? have you your sharp edged 
  axes?
  Pioneers! O pioneers!



2
For we cannot tarry here,

  We must march my darlings, we must bear the brunt of 
  danger,


  We, the youthful sinewy races, all the rest on us depend,
  Pioneers! O pioneers!



3
O you youths, western youths,

  So impatient, full of action, full of manly pride and 
  friendship,


  Plain I see you, western youths, see you tramping with 
  the foremost,
  Pioneers! O pioneers!



4
Have the elder races halted?

  Do they droop and end their lesson, wearied, over there 
  beyond the seas?


  We take up the task eternal, and the burden, and the 
  lesson,
  Pioneers! O pioneers!






5
All the past we leave behind;

  We debouch upon a newer, mightier world, varied 
  world; 


  Fresh and strong the world we seize, world of labor and 
  the march,
  Pioneers! O pioneers!



6
We detachments steady throwing,

  Down the edges, through the passes, up the mountains 
  steep,


  Conquering, holding, daring, venturing, as we go, the 
  unknown ways,
  Pioneers! O pioneers!



7
We primeval forests felling,

  We the rivers stemming, vexing we, and piercing deep 
  the mines within; 


  We the surface broad surveying, and the virgin soil up-
  heaving,
  Pioneers! O pioneers!



8
Colorado men are we,

  From the peaks gigantic, from the great sierras and the 
  high plateaus,


  From the mine and from the gully, from the hunting 
  trail we come,
  Pioneers! O pioneers!



9
From Nebraska, from Arkansas,

  Central inland race are we, from Missouri, with the con-
  tinental blood intervein'd; 


  All the hands of comrades clasping, all the Southern, all 
  the Northern,
  Pioneers! O pioneers!






10
O resistless, restless race!

  O beloved race in all! O my breast aches with tender 
  love for all!


  O I mourn and yet exult&#8212;I am rapt with love for all,
  Pioneers! O pioneers!



11
Raise the mighty mother mistress,

  Waving high the delicate mistress, over all the starry 
  mistress, (bend your heads all,)


  Raise the fang'd and warlike mistress, stern, impassive,
  weapon'd mistress,
  Pioneers! O pioneers!



12
See, my children, resolute children,

  By those swarms upon our rear, we must never yield or 
  falter,


  Ages back in ghostly millions, frowning there behind us 
  urging,
  Pioneers! O pioneers!



13
On and on, the compact ranks,

  With accessions ever waiting, with the places of the 
  dead quickly fill'd,


  Through the battle, through defeat, moving yet and 
  never stopping,
  Pioneers! O pioneers!



14
O to die advancing on!

  Are there some of us to droop and die? has the hour 
  come?


  Then upon the march we fittest die, soon and sure the 
  gap is fill'd,
  Pioneers! O pioneers!






15
All the pulses of the world,

  Falling in, they beat for us, with the western movement 
  beat; 


  Holding single or together, steady moving, to the front,
  all for us,
  Pioneers! O pioneers!



16
Life's involv'd and varied pageants,

  All the forms and shows, all the workmen at their 
  work,


  All the seamen and the landsmen, all the masters with 
  their slaves,
  Pioneers! O pioneers!



17
All the hapless silent lovers,

  All the prisoners in the prisons, all the righteous and 
  the wicked,


  All the joyous, all the sorrowing, all the living, all the 
  dying,
  Pioneers! O pioneers!



18
I too with my soul and body,
We, a curious trio, picking, wandering on our way,

  Through these shores, amid the shadows, with the 
  apparitions pressing,
  Pioneers! O pioneers!



19
Lo! the darting bowling orb!

  Lo! the brother orbs around! all the clustering suns and 
  planets; 


  All the dazzling days, all the mystic nights with dreams,
  Pioneers! O pioneers!






20
These are of us, they are with us,

  All for primal needed work, while the followers there in 
  embryo wait behind,


  We to-day's procession heading, we the route for travel 
  clearing,
  Pioneers! O pioneers!



21
O you daughters of the west!

  O you young and elder daughters! O you mothers and 
  you wives!


  Never must you be divided, in our ranks you move 
  united,
  Pioneers! O pioneers!



22
Minstrels latent on the prairies!

  (Shrouded bards of other lands! you may sleep&#8212;you 
  have done your work;)


  Soon I hear you coming warbling, soon you rise and 
  tramp amid us,
  Pioneers! O pioneers!



23
Not for delectations sweet;

  Not the cushion and the slipper, not the peaceful and 
  the studious; 


  Not the riches safe and palling, not for us the tame en-
  joyment,
  Pioneers! O pioneers!



24
Do the feasters gluttonous feast?

  Do the corpulent sleepers sleep? have they lock'd and 
  bolted doors?


  Still be ours the diet hard, and the blanket on the 
  ground,
  Pioneers! O pioneers!






25
Has the night descended?

  Was the road of late so toilsome? did we stop discour-
  aged, nodding on our way?


  Yet a passing hour I yield you, in your tracks to pause 
  oblivious,
  Pioneers! O pioneers!



26
Till with sound of trumpet,

  Far, far off the day-break call&#8212;hark! how loud and 
  clear I hear it wind; 


  Swift! to the head of the army!&#8212;swift! spring to 
  your places,
  Pioneers! O pioneers!





QUICKSAND YEARS THAT WHIRL ME I KNOW NOT WHITHER.

QUICKSAND years that whirl me I know not whither,

  Your schemes, politics, fail&#8212;lines give way&#8212;substan-
  ces mock and elude me; 


  Only the theme I sing, the great and strong-possess'd 
  soul, eludes not; 


  One's-self, must never give way&#8212;that is the final sub-
  stance&#8212;that out of all is sure; 


  Out of politics, triumphs, battles, death&#8212;what at last 
  finally remains?

When shows break up, what but One's-Self is sure?






THE DRESSER.

An old man bending, I come, among new faces,

  Years looking backward, resuming, in answer to chil-
  dren,


  Come tell us old man, as from young men and maidens 
  that love me; 


  Years hence of these scenes, of these furious passions,
  these chances,


  Of unsurpass'd heroes, (was one side so brave? the 
  other was equally brave;)


  Now be witness again&#8212;paint the mightiest armies of 
  earth; 


  Of those armies so rapid, so wondrous, what saw you to 
  tell us?


  What stays with you latest and deepest? of curious 
  panics,


  Of hard-fought engagements, or sieges tremendous,
  what deepest remains?



O maidens and young men I love, and that love me,

  What you ask of my days, those the strangest and sud-
  den your talking recals; 


  Soldier alert I arrive, after a long march, cover'd with 
  sweat and dust; 


  In the nick of time I come, plunge in the fight, loudly 
  shout in the rush of successful charge; 


  Enter the captur'd works . . . . yet lo! like a swift-
  running river, they fade; 


  Pass and are gone, they fade&#8212;I dwell not on soldiers' 
  perils or soldiers' joys; 


  (Both I remember well&#8212;many the hardships, few the 
  joys, yet I was content.)






But in silence, in dream's projections,

  While the world of gain and appearance and mirth goes 
  on,


  So soon what is over forgotten, and waves wash the 
  imprints off the sand,


  In nature's reverie sad, with hinged knees returning, I 
  enter the doors&#8212;(while for you up there,


  Whoever you are, follow me without noise, and be of 
  strong heart.)



Bearing the bandages, water and sponge,
Straight and swift to my wounded I go,

  Where they lie on the ground, after the battle brought 
  in; 


  Where their priceless blood reddens the grass, the 
  ground; 


  Or to the rows of the hospital tent, or under the roof'd 
  hospital; 


  To the long rows of cots, up and down, each side, I 
  return; 


  To each and all, one after another, I draw near&#8212;not 
  one do I miss; 


  An attendant follows, holding a tray&#8212;he carries a 
  refuse pail,


  Soon to be fill'd with clotted rags and blood, emptied,
  and fill'd again.



I onward go, I stop,
With hinged knees and steady hand, to dress wounds;

  I am firm with each&#8212;the pangs are sharp, yet unavoid-
  able; 


  One turns to me his appealing eyes&#8212;(poor boy! I 
  never knew you,


  Yet I think I could not refuse this moment to die for 
  you, if that would save you.)




  On, on I go&#8212;(open, doors of time! open, hospital 
  doors!)





  The crush'd head I dress, (poor crazed hand, tear not the 
  bandage away;)


  The neck of the cavalry-man, with the bullet through 
  and through, I examine; 


  Hard the breathing rattles, quite glazed already the eye,
  yet life struggles hard; 

(Come, sweet death! be persuaded, O beautiful death!
In mercy come quickly.)


From the stump of the arm, the amputated hand,

  I undo the clotted lint, remove the slough, wash off the 
  matter and blood; 


  Back on his pillow the soldier bends, with curv'd neck,
  and side-falling head; 


  His eyes are closed, his face is pale, he dares not look on 
  the bloody stump,

And has not yet looked on it.


I dress a wound in the side, deep, deep;

  But a day or two more&#8212;for see, the frame all wasted 
  and sinking,

And the yellow-blue countenance see.



  I dress the perforated shoulder, the foot with the bul-
  let wound,


  Cleanse the one with a gnawing and putrid gangrene, so 
  sickening, so offensive,


  While the attendant stands behind aside me, holding 
  the tray and pail.



I am faithful, I do not give out;

  The fractur'd thigh, the knee, the wound in the abdo-
  men,


  These and more I dress with impassive hand&#8212;(yet 
  deep in my breast a fire, a burning flame.)



Thus in silence, in dream's projections,

  Returning, resuming, I thread my way through the hos-
  pitals; 




The hurt and the wounded I pacify with soothing hand,

  I sit by the restless all the dark night&#8212;some are so 
  young; 


  Some suffer so much&#8212;I recall the experience sweet 
  and sad; 


  (Many a soldier's loving arms about this neck have 
  cross'd and rested,

Many a soldier's kiss dwells on these bearded lips.)




WHEN I HEARD THE LEARN'D ASTRONOMER.

WHEN I heard the learn'd astronomer;

  When the proofs, the figures, were ranged in columns 
  before me; 


  When I was shown the charts and the diagrams, to add,
  divide, and measure them; 


  When I, sitting, heard the astronomer, where he 
  lectured with much applause in the lecture-room,

How soon, unaccountable, I became tired and sick;
Till rising and gliding out, I wander'd off by myself,
In the mystical moist night-air, and from time to time,
Look'd up in perfect silence at the stars.






RISE O DAYS FROM YOUR FATHOM-LESS DEEPS.

1

  RISE, O days, from your fathomless deeps, till you loftier 
  and fiercer sweep!


  Long for my soul, hungering gymnastic, I devour'd 
  what the earth gave me; 


  Long I roam'd the woods of the north&#8212;long I watch'd 
  Niagara pouring; 


  I travel'd the prairies over, and slept on their breast&#8212;I 
  cross'd the Nevadas, I cross'd the plateaus; 


  I ascended the towering rocks along the Pacific, I sail'd 
  out to sea; 

I sail'd through the storm, I was refresh'd by the storm;
I watch'd with joy the threatening maws of the waves;

  I mark'd the white combs where they career'd so high,
  curling over; 

I heard the wind piping, I saw the black clouds;

  Saw from below what arose and mounted, (O superb! O 
  wild as my heart, and powerful!)


  Heard the continuous thunder, as it bellow'd after the 
  lightning; 


  Noted the slender and jagged threads of lightning, as 
  sudden and fast amid the din they chased each 
  other across the sky; 


  &#8212;These, and such as these, I, elate, saw&#8212;saw with 
  wonder, yet pensive and masterful; 

All the menacing might of the globe uprisen around me;

  Yet there with my soul I fed&#8212;I fed content, super-
  cilious.






2

  'Twas well, O soul! 'twas a good preparation you gave 
  me!

Now we advance our latent and ampler hunger to fill;

  Now we go forth to receive what the earth and the sea 
  never gave us; 


  Not through the mighty woods we go, but through the 
  mightier cities; 


  Something for us is pouring now, more than Niagara 
  pouring; 


  Torrents of men, (sources and rills of the Northwest, are 
  you indeed inexhaustible?)


  What, to pavements and homesteads here&#8212;what were 
  those storms of the mountains and sea?


  What, to passions I witness around me to-day? Was 
  the sea risen?


  Was the wind piping the pipe of death under the black 
  clouds?


  Lo! from deeps more unfathomable, something more 
  deadly and savage; 


  Manhattan, rising, advancing with menacing front&#8212; 
  Cincinnati, Chicago, unchain'd; 


  &#8212;What was that swell I saw on the ocean? behold 
  what comes here!


  How it climbs with daring feet and hands! how it 
  dashes!


  How the true thunder bellows after the lightning! how 
  bright the flashes of lightning!


  How DEMOCRACY, with desperate vengeful port strides 
  on, shown through the dark by those flashes of 
  lightning!


  (Yet a mournful wail and low sob I fancied I heard 
  through the dark,

In a lull of the deafening confusion.)


3

  Thunder on! stride on Democracy! strike with vengeful 
  stroke!

And do you rise higher than ever yet, O days, O cities!




  Crash heavier, heavier yet, O storms! you have done 
  me good; 


  My soul, prepared in the mountains, absorbs your im-
  mortal strong nutriment; 


  Long had I walk'd my cities, my country roads, through 
  farms, only half satisfied; 


  One doubt, nauseous, undulating like a snake, crawl'd 
  on the ground before me,


  Continually preceding my steps, turning upon me oft,
  ironically hissing low; 


  &#8212;The cities I loved so well, I abandon'd and left&#8212;I 
  sped to the certainties suitable to me; 


  Hungering, hungering, hungering, for primal energies,
  and Nature's dauntlessness,

I refresh'd myself with it only, I could relish it only;

  I waited the bursting forth of the pent fire&#8212;on the 
  water and air I waited long; 


  &#8212;But now I no longer wait&#8212;I am fully satisfied&#8212;I 
  am glutted; 


  I have witness'd the true lighting&#8212;I have witness'd 
  my cities electric; 


  I have lived to behold man burst forth, and warlike 
  America rise; 


  Hence I will seek no more the food of the northern soli-
  tary wilds,

No more on the mountains roam, or sail the stormy sea.




A CHILD'S AMAZE.

SILENT and amazed, even when a little boy,

  I remember I heard the preacher every Sunday put God 
  in his statements,

As contending against some being or influence.






BEAT! BEAT! DRUMS!

1

BEAT! beat! drums!&#8212;Blow! bugles! blow!

  Through the windows&#8212;through doors&#8212;burst like a 
  force of ruthless men,

Into the solemn church, and scatter the congregation;
Into the school where the scholar is studying:

  Leave not the bridegroom quiet&#8212;no happiness must 
  he have now with his bride; 


  Nor the peaceful farmer any peace, plowing his field or 
  gathering his grain; 


  So fierce you whirr and pound, you drums&#8212;so shrill 
  you bugles blow.



2
Beat! beat! drums!&#8212;Blow! bugles! blow!

  Over the traffic of cities&#8212;over the rumble of wheels in 
  the streets: 


  Are beds prepared for sleepers at night in the houses?
  No sleepers must sleep in those beds; 


  No bargainers' bargains by day&#8212;no brokers or specu-
  lators&#8212;Would they continue?


  Would the talkers be talking? would the singer attempt 
  to sing?


  Would the lawyer rise in the court to state his case 
  before the judge?


  Then rattle quicker, heavier drums&#8212;you bugles wilder 
  blow.



3
Beat! beat! drums!&#8212;Blow! bugles! blow!
Make no parley&#8212;stop for no expostulation;
Mind not the timid&#8212;mind not the weeper or prayer;
Mind not the old man beseeching the young man;

  Let not the child's voice be heard, nor the mother's en-
  treaties; 


  Make even the trestles to shake the dead, where they lie 
  awaiting the hearses,


  So strong you thump, O terrible drums&#8212;so loud 
  you bugles blow.








COME UP FROM THE FIELDS FATHER.


  Come up from the fields, father, here's a letter from 
  our Pete; 


  And come to the front door, mother&#8212;here's a letter 
  from thy dear son.



Lo, 'tis autumn;
Lo, where the trees, deeper green, yellower and redder,

  Cool and sweeten Ohio's villages, with leaves fluttering 
  in the moderate wind; 


  Where apples ripe in the orchards hang, and grapes on 
  the trellis'd vines; 

(Smell you the smell of the grapes on the vines?

  Smell you the buckwheat, where the bees were lately 
  buzzing?)




  Above all, lo, the sky, so calm, so transparent after 
  the rain, and with wondrous clouds; 


  Below, too, all calm, all vital and beautiful&#8212;and the 
  farm prospers well.



Down in the fields all prospers well;

  But now from the fields come, father&#8212;come at the 
  daughter's call; 


  And come to the entry, mother&#8212;to the front door come,
  right away.


  
        
  Fast as she can she hurries&#8212;something ominous&#8212; 
  her steps trembling; 


  She does not tarry to smooth her white hair, nor adjust 
  her cap.






Open the envelope quickly;
O this is not our son's writing, yet his name is sign'd;

  O a strange hand writes for our dear son&#8212;O stricken 
  mother's soul!


  All swims before her eyes&#8212;flashes with black&#8212;she 
  catches the main words only; 


  Sentences broken&#8212;gun-shot wound in the breast, cavalry 
  skirmish, taken to hospital, 

At present low, but will soon be better.


Ah, now the single figure to me,

  Amid all teeming and wealthy Ohio, with all its cities 
  and farms,

Sickly white in the face and dull in the head, very faint,
By the jamb of a door leans.



  Grieve not so, dear mother, (the just-grown daughter 
  speaks through her sobs; 


  The little sisters huddle around, speechless and dis-
  may'd;)



See, dearest mother, the letter says Pete will soon be better.



  Alas, poor boy, he will never be better, (nor may-be 
  needs to be better, that brave and simple soul;)

While they stand at home at the door, he is dead already;
The only son is dead.


But the mother needs to be better;
She, with thin form, presently drest in black;

  By day her meals untouch'd&#8212;then at night fitfully 
  sleeping, often waking,


  In the midnight waking, weeping, longing with one deep 
  longing,


  O that she might withdraw unnoticed&#8212;silent from life,
  escape and withdraw,

To follow, to seek, to be with her dear dead son.







CITY OF SHIPS.

CITY of ships!
(O the black ships! O the fierce ships!
O the beautiful, sharp bow'd steam-ships and sail-ships!)
City of the world! (for all races are here;
All the lands of the earth make contributions here;)
City of the sea! city of hurried and glittering tides!

  City whose gleeful tides continually rush or recede,
  whirling in and out, with eddies and foam!


  City of wharves and stores! city of tall fa&#231;ades of mar-
  ble and iron!


  Proud and passionate city! mettlesome, mad, extrava-
  gant city!


  Spring up, O city! not for peace alone, but be indeed 
  yourself, warlike!

Fear not! submit to no models but your own, O city!
Behold me! incarnate me, as I have incarnated you!

  I have rejected nothing you offer'd me&#8212;whom you 
  adopted, I have adopted; 


  Good or bad, I never question you&#8212;I love all&#8212;I do 
  not condemn anything; 


  I chant and celebrate all that is yours&#8212;yet peace no 
  more; 


  In peace I chanted peace, but now the drum of war is 
  mine; 

War, red war, is my song through your streets, O city!



MOTHER AND BABE.

  I SEE the sleeping babe, nestling the breast of its 
  mother; 


  The sleeping mother and babe&#8212;hush'd, I study them 
  long and long.







VIGIL STRANGE I KEPT ON THE FIELD ONE NIGHT.

VIGIL strange I kept on the field one night,

  When you, my son and my comrade, dropt at my side 
  that day,


  One look I but gave, which your dear eyes return'd,
  with a look I shall never forget; 


  One touch of your hand to mine, O boy, reach'd up as 
  you lay on the ground; 


  Then onward I sped in the battle, the even-contested 
  battle; 


  Till late in the night reliev'd, to the place at last again I 
  made my way; 


  Found you in death so cold, dear comrade&#8212;found your 
  body, son of responding kisses, (never again on 
  earth responding;)


  Bared your face in the starlight&#8212;curious the scene&#8212; 
  cool blew the moderate night-wind; 


  Long there and then in vigil I stood, dimly around me 
  the battle-field spreading; 


  Vigil wondrous and vigil sweet, there in the fragrant 
  silent night; 


  But not a tear fell, not even a long-drawn sigh&#8212;Long,
  long I gazed; 


  Then on the earth partially reclining, sat by your side,
  leaning my chin in my hands; 


  Passing sweet hours, immortal and mystic hours with 
  you, dearest comrade&#8212;Not a tear, not a word; 


  Vigil of silence, love and death&#8212;vigil for you, my son 
  and my soldier,


  As onward silently stars aloft, eastward new ones up-
  ward stole; 


  Vigil final for you, brave boy, (I could not save you,
  swift was your death,





  I faithfully loved you and cared for you living&#8212;I think 
  we shall surely meet again;)


  Till at latest lingering of the night, indeed just as the 
  dawn appear'd,


  My comrade I wrapt in his blanket, envelop'd well his 
  form,


  Folded the blanket well, tucking it carefully over head,
  and carefully under feet; 


  And there and then, and bathed by the rising sun, my 
  son in his grave, in his rude-dug grave I de-
  posited; 


  Ending my vigil strange with that&#8212;vigil of night and 
  battle-field dim; 


  Vigil for boy of responding kisses, (never again on earth 
  responding;)


  Vigil for comrade swiftly slain&#8212;vigil I never forget,
  how as day brighten'd,


  I rose from the chill ground, and folded my soldier well 
  in his blanket,

And buried him where he fell.



BATHED IN WAR'S PERFUME.

BATHED in war's perfume&#8212;delicate flag!

  O to hear you call the sailors and the soldiers! flag like 
  a beautiful woman!


  O to hear the tramp, tramp, of a million answering men!
  O the ships they arm with joy!


  O to see you leap and beckon from the tall masts of 
  ships!

O to see you peering down on the sailors on the decks!
Flag like the eyes of women.






A MARCH IN THE RANKS HARD-PREST, AND THE ROAD UNKNOWN.

A MARCH in the ranks hard-prest, and the road unknown;

  A route through a heavy wood, with muffled steps in the 
  darkness; 


  Our army foil'd with loss severe, and the sullen remnant 
  retreating; 


  Till after midnight glimmer upon us, the lights of a 
  dim-lighted building; 


  We come to an open space in the woods, and halt by the 
  dim-lighted building; 


  'Tis a large old church, at the crossing roads&#8212;'tis now 
  an impromptu hospital; 


  &#8212;Entering but for a minute, I see a sight beyond all 
  the pictures and poems ever made: 


  Shadows of deepest, deepest black, just lit by moving 
  candles and lamps,


  And by one great pitchy torch, stationary, with wild red 
  flame, and clouds of smoke; 


  By these, crowds, groups of forms, vaguely I see, on the 
  floor, some in the pews laid down; 


  At my feet more distinctly, a soldier, a mere lad, in 
  danger of bleeding to death, (he is shot in the ab-
  domen;)


  I staunch the blood temporarily, (the youngster's face is 
  white as a lily;)


  Then before I depart I sweep my eyes o'er the scene,
  fain to absorb it all; 


  Faces, varieties, postures beyond description, most in 
  obscurity, some of them dead; 


  Surgeons operating, attendants holding lights, the smell 
  of ether, the odor of blood; 





  The crowd, O the crowd of the bloody forms of soldiers 
  &#8212;the yard outside also fill'd; 


  Some on the bare ground, some on planks or stretchers,
  some in the death-spasm sweating; 


  An occasional scream or cry, the doctor's shouted orders 
  or calls; 


  The glisten of the little steel instruments catching the 
  glint of the torches; 


  These I resume as I chant&#8212;I see again the forms, I 
  smell the odor; 


  Then hear outside the orders given, Fall in, my men, 
  Fall in; 


  But first I bend to the dying lad&#8212;his eyes open&#8212;a 
  half-smile gives he me; 


  Then the eyes close, calmly close, and I speed forth to 
  the darkness,


  Resuming, marching, as ever in darkness marching, on 
  in the ranks,

The unknown road still marching.



LONG, TOO LONG, O LAND.

LONG, too long, O land,

  Traveling roads all even and peaceful, you learn'd from 
  joys and prosperity only; 


  But now, ah now, to learn from crises of anguish&#8212;ad-
  vancing, grappling with direst fate, and recoiling 
  not; 


  And now to conceive, and show to the world, what your 
  children en-masse really are; 


  (For who except myself has yet conceived what your 
  children en-masse really are?)







A SIGHT IN CAMP IN THE DAY-BREAK GREY AND DIM.


A SIGHT in camp in the day-break grey and dim,
As from my tent I emerge so early, sleepless,

  As slow I walk in the cool fresh air, the path near by 
  the hospital-tent,


  Three forms I see on stretchers lying, brought out there,
  untended lying,


  Over each the blanket spread, ample brownish woolen 
  blanket,

Grey and heavy blanket, folding, covering all.


Curious, I halt, and silent stand;

  Then with light fingers I from the face of the nearest,
  the first, just lift the blanket: 


  Who are you, elderly man so gaunt and grim, with 
  well-grey'd hair, and flesh all sunken about the 
  eyes?

Who are you, my dear comrade?



  Then to the second I step&#8212;And who are you, my 
  child and darling?

Who are you, sweet boy, with cheeks yet blooming?



  Then to the third&#8212;a face nor child, nor old, very 
  calm, as of beautiful yellow-white ivory: 


  Young man, I think I know you&#8212;I think this face of 
  yours is the face of the Christ himself; 


  Dead and divine, and brother of all, and here again he 
  lies.





A FARM PICTURE.

  THROUGH the ample open door of the peaceful country 
  barn,

A sun-lit pasture field, with cattle and horses feeding.






GIVE ME THE SPLENDID SILENT SUN.

1

  GIVE me the splendid silent sun, with all his beams full-
  dazzling; 


  Give me juicy autumnal fruit, ripe and red from the 
  orchard; 

Give me a field where the unmow'd grass grows;
Give me an arbor, give me the trellis'd grape;

  Give me fresh corn and wheat&#8212;give me serene-moving 
  animals, teaching content; 


  Give me nights perfectly quiet, as on high plateaus west 
  of the Mississippi, and I looking up at the stars; 


  Give me odorous at sunrise a garden of beautiful flowers,
  where I can walk undisturb'd; 


  Give me for marriage a sweet-breath'd woman, of whom 
  I should never tire; 


  Give me a perfect child&#8212;give me, away, aside from the 
  noise of the world, a rural domestic life; 


  Give me to warble spontaneous songs, reliev'd, recluse 
  by myself, for my own ears only; 


  Give me solitude&#8212;give me Nature&#8212;give me again,
  O Nature, your primal sanities!


  &#8212;These, demanding to have them, (tired with ceaseless 
  excitement, and rack'd by the war-strife;)


  These to procure, incessantly asking, rising in cries from 
  my heart,

While yet incessantly asking, still I adhere to my city;

  Day upon day, and year upon year, O city, walking 
  your streets,


  Where you hold me enchain'd a certain time, refusing 
  to give me up; 


  Yet giving to make me glutted, enrich'd of soul&#8212;you 
  give me forever faces; 





  (O I see what I sought to escape, confronting, reversing 
  my cries; 

I see my own soul trampling down what it ask'd for.)


2
Keep your splendid silent sun;

  Keep your woods, O Nature, and the quiet places by 
  the woods; 


  Keep your fields of clover and timothy, and your corn-
  fields and orchards; 


  Keep the blossoming buckwheat fields, where the Ninth-
  month bees hum; 


  Give me faces and streets! give me these phantoms in-
  cessant and endless along the trottoirs!


  Give me interminable eyes! give me women! give me 
  comrades and lovers by the thousand!


  Let me see new ones every day! let me hold new ones 
  by the hand every day!

Give me such shows! give me the streets of Manhattan!

  Give me Broadway, with the soldiers marching&#8212;give 
  me the sound of the trumpets and drums!


  (The soldiers in companies or regiments&#8212;some, starting 
  away, flush'd and reckless; 


  Some, their time up, returning, with thinn'd ranks&#8212; 
  young, yet very old, worn, marching, noticing 
  nothing;)


  &#8212;Give me the shores and the wharves heavy-fringed 
  with the black ships!


  O such for me! O an intense life! O full to repletion,
  and varied!

The life of the theatre, bar-room, huge hotel, for me!

  The saloon of the steamer! the crowded excursion for 
  me! the torch-light procession!


  The dense brigade, bound for the war, with high piled 
  military wagons following; 


  People, endless, streaming, with strong voices, passions,
  pageants; 


  Manhattan streets, with their powerful throbs, with the 
  beating drums, as now; 





  The endless and noisy chorus, the rustle and clank of 
  muskets, (even the sight of the wounded;)


  Manhattan crowds with their turbulent musical chorus 
  &#8212;with varied chorus and light of the sparkling 
  eyes; 

Manhattan faces and eyes forever for me.




OVER THE CARNAGE ROSE PROPHETIC A VOICE.


OVER the carnage rose prophetic a voice,

  Be not dishearten'd&#8212;Affection shall solve the problems 
  of Freedom yet; 


  Those who love each other shall become invincible&#8212; 
  they shall yet make Columbia victorious.




  Sons of the Mother of All! you shall yet be victo-
  rious!


  You shall yet laugh to scorn the attacks of all the re-
  mainder of the earth.



No danger shall balk Columbia's lovers;

  If need be, a thousand shall sternly immolate themselves 
  for one.




  One from Massachusetts shall be a Missourian's com-
  rade; 


  From Maine and from hot Carolina, and another an Ore-
  gonese, shall be friends triune,


  More precious to each other than all the riches of the 
  earth.






To Michigan, Florida perfumes shall tenderly come;

  Not the perfumes of flowers, but sweeter, and wafted 
  beyond death.




  It shall be customary in the houses and streets to see 
  manly affection; 


  The most dauntless and rude shall touch face to face 
  lightly; 

The dependence of Liberty shall be lovers,
The continuance of Equality shall be comrades.



  These shall tie you and band you stronger than hoops 
  of iron; 


  I, extatic, O partners! O lands! with the love of lovers 
  tie you.



Were you looking to be held together by the lawyers?
Or by an agreement on a paper? or by arms?

  &#8212;Nay&#8212;nor the world, nor any living thing, will so 
  cohere.





DID YOU ASK DULCET RHYMES FROM ME?

DID YOU ask dulcet rhymes from me?

  Did you find what I sang erewhile so hard to follow,
  to understand?


  Why I was not singing erewhile for you to follow, to 
  understand&#8212;nor am I now; 


  &#8212;What to such as you, anyhow, such a poet as I?
  &#8212;therefore leave my works,

And go lull yourself with what you can understand;
For I lull nobody&#8212;and you will never understand me.






YEAR OF METEORS. (1859-60.)

YEAR of meteors! brooding year!

  I would bind in words retrospective, some of your deeds 
  and signs; 

I would sing your contest for the 19th Presidentiad;

  I would sing how an old man, tall, with white hair,
  mounted the scaffold in Virginia; 


  (I was at hand&#8212;silent I stood, with teeth shut close&#8212;I 
  watch'd; 


  I stood very near you, old man, when cool and indiffer-
  ent, but trembling with age and your unheal'd 
  wounds, you mounted the scaffold;)


  I would sing in my copious song your census returns of 
  The States,


  The tables of population and products&#8212;I would sing of 
  your ships and their cargoes,


  The proud black ships of Manhattan, arriving, some 
  fill'd with immigrants, some from the isthmus 
  with cargoes of gold; 


  Songs thereof would I sing&#8212;to all that hitherward 
  comes would I welcome give; 


  And you would I sing, fair stripling! welcome to you 
  from me, sweet boy of England!


  Remember you surging Manhattan's crowds, as you 
  passed with your cortege of nobles?


  There in the crowds stood I, and singled you out with 
  attachment; 


  I know not why, but I loved you&#8230;(and so go forth 
  little song,


  Far over sea speed like an arrow, carrying my love all 
  folded,





  And find in his palace the youth I love, and drop these 
  lines at his feet;)


  &#8212;Nor forget I to sing of the wonder, the ship as she 
  swam up my bay,


  Well-shaped and stately the Great Eastern swam up my 
  bay, she was 600 feet long,


  Her moving swiftly, surrounded by myriads of small 
  craft, I forget not to sing; 


  Nor the comet that came unannounced, out of the north,
  flaring in heaven,


  Nor the strange huge meteor procession, dazzling and 
  clear, shooting over our heads,


  (A moment, a moment long, it sail'd its balls of unearth-
  ly light over our heads,

Then departed, dropt in the night, and was gone;)

  &#8212;Of such, and fitful as they, I sing&#8212;with gleams from 
  them would I gleam and patch these chants; 


  Your chants, O year all mottled with evil and good!
  year of forebodings! year of the youth I love!


  Year of comets and meteors transient and strange!&#8212;lo!
  even here, one equally transient and strange!


  As I flit through you hastily, soon to fall and be gone,
  what is this book,

What am I myself but one of your meteors?



THE TORCH.

  On my northwest coast in the midst of the night, a 
  fishermen's group stands watching; 


  Out on the lake, expanding before them, others are 
  spearing salmon; 


  The canoe, a dim and shadowy thing, moves across the 
  black water,

Bearing a Torch a-blaze at the prow.






YEARS OF THE UNPERFORM'D.

  YEARS of the unperform'd! your horizon rises&#8212;I see it 
  parting away for more august dramas; 


  I see not America only&#8212;I see not only Liberty's nation,
  but other nations preparing; 


  I see tremendous entrances and exits&#8212;I see new com-
  binations&#8212;I see the solidarity of races; 


  I see that force advancing with irresistible power on the 
  world's stage; 


  (Have the old forces played their parts? are the acts 
  suitable to them closed?)


  I see Freedom, completely arm'd, and victorious, and 
  very haughty, with Law by her side, both issuing 
  forth against the idea of caste; 


  &#8212;What historic denouements are these we so rapidly 
  approach?


  I see men marching and countermarching by swift mil-
  lions; 


  I see the frontiers and boundaries of the old aristocracies 
  broken; 

I see the landmarks of European kings removed;

  I see this day the People beginning their landmarks, (all 
  others give way;)

Never were such sharp questions ask'd as this day;

  Never was average man, his soul, more energetic, more 
  like a God; 


  Lo, how he urges and urges, leaving the masses no 
  rest; 


  His daring foot is on land and sea everywhere&#8212;he col-
  onizes the Pacific, the archipelagoes; 


  With the steam-ship, the electric telegraph, the news-
  paper, the wholesale engines of war,


  With these, and the world-spreading factories, he inter-
  links all geography, all lands; 





  &#8212;What whispers are these, O lands, running ahead of 
  you, passing under the seas?


  Are all nations communing? is there going to be but 
  one heart to the globe?


  Is humanity forming, en-masse?&#8212;for lo! tyrants trem-
  ble, crowns grow dim; 


  The earth, restive, confronts a new era, perhaps a gen-
  eral divine war; 


  No one knows what will happen next&#8212;such portents 
  fill the days and nights; 


  Years prophetical! the space ahead as I walk, as I vain-
  ly try to pierce it, is full of phantoms; 


  Unborn deeds, things soon to be, project their shapes 
  around me; 


  This incredible rush and heat&#8212;this strange extactic 
  fever of dreams, O years!


  Your dreams, O years, how they penetrate through me!
  (I know not whether I sleep or wake!)


  The perform'd America and Europe grow dim, retiring 
  in shadow behind me,


  The unperform'd, more gigantic than ever, advance, ad-
  vance upon me.




YEAR THAT TREMBLED AND REEL'D BENEATH ME.

YEAR that trembled and reel'd beneath me!

  Your summer wind was warm enough&#8212;yet the air I 
  breathed froze me; 


  A thick gloom fell through the sunshine and darken'd 
  me; 

Must I change my triumphant songs? said I to myself;

  Must I indeed learn to chant the cold dirges of the baf-
  fled?

And sullen hymns of defeat?






THE VETERAN'S VISION.

  WHILE my wife at my side lies slumbering, and the wars 
  are over long,


  And my head on the pillow rests at home, and the mys-
  tic midnight passes,


  And through the stillness, through the dark, I hear, just 
  hear, the breath of my infant,


  There in the room, as I wake from sleep, this vision 
  presses upon me: 


  The engagement opens there and then, in my busy brain 
  unreal; 


  The skirmishers begin&#8212;they crawl cautiously ahead&#8212; 
  I hear the irregular snap! snap!


  I hear the sounds of the different missiles&#8212;the short 
  t-h-t! t-h-t! of the rifle balls; 


  I see the shells exploding, leaving small white clouds&#8212; 
  I hear the great shells shrieking as they pass; 


  The grape, like the hum and whirr of wind through the 
  trees, (quick, tumultuous, now the contest rages!)


  All the scenes at the batteries themselves rise in detail 
  before me again; 


  The crashing and smoking&#8212;the pride of the men in 
  their pieces; 


  The chief gunner ranges and sights his piece, and selects 
  a fuse of the right time; 


  After firing, I see him lean aside, and look eagerly off 
  to note the effect; 


  &#8212;Elsewhere I hear the cry of a regiment charging&#8212; 
  (the young colonel leads himself this time, with 
  brandish'd sword;)


  I see the gaps cut by the enemy's volleys, (quickly 
  fill'd up&#8212;no delay;)


  I breathe the suffocating smoke&#8212;then the flat clouds 
  hover low, concealing all; 





  Now a strange lull comes for a few seconds, not a shot 
  fired on either side; 


  Then resumed, the chaos louder than ever, with eager 
  calls, and orders of officers; 


  While from some distant part of the field the wind wafts 
  to my ears a shout of applause, (some special 
  success;)


  And ever the sound of the cannon, far or near, (rousing,
  even in dreams, a devilish exultation, and all the 
  old mad joy, in the depths of my soul;)


  And ever the hastening of infantry shifting positions&#8212; 
  batteries, cavalry, moving hither and thither; 


  (The falling, dying, I heed not&#8212;the wounded, dripping 
  and red, I heed not&#8212;some to the rear are hob-
  bling;)


  Grime, heat, rush&#8212;aid-de-camps galloping by, or on a 
  full run; 


  With the patter of small arms, the warning s-s-t of the 
  rifles, (these in my vision I hear or see,)


  And bombs bursting in air, and at night the vari-color'd 
  rockets.




O TAN-FACED PRAIRIE-BOY.

O TAN-FACED prairie-boy!
Before you came to camp, came many a welcome gift;

  Praises and presents came, and nourishing food&#8212;till at 
  last among the recruits,


  You came, taciturn, with nothing to give&#8212;we but 
  look'd on each other,


  When lo! more than all the gifts of the world, you 
  gave me.







CAMPS OF GREEN.


NOT alone our camps of white, O soldiers,
When, as order'd forward, after a long march,

  Footsore and weary, soon as the light lessens, we halt 
  for the night; 


  Some of us so fatigued, carrying the gun and knapsack,
  dropping asleep in our tracks; 


  Others pitching the little tents, and the fires lit up begin 
  to sparkle; 


  Outposts of pickets posted, surrounding, alert through 
  the dark,

And a word provided for countersign, careful for safety;

  Till to the call of the drummers at daybreak loudly 
  beating the drums,


  We rise up refresh'd, the night and sleep pass'd over,
  and resume our journey,

Or proceed to battle.


Lo! the camps of the tents of green,

  Which the days of peace keep filling, and the days of 
  war keep filling,


  With a mystic army, (is it too order'd forward? is it too 
  only halting awhile,

Till night and sleep pass over?)



  Now in those camps of green&#8212;in their tents dotting 
  the world; 


  In the parents, children, husbands, wives, in them&#8212; 
  in the old and young,


  Sleeping under the sunlight, sleeping under the moon-
  light, content and silent there at last,


  Behold the mighty bivouac-field, and waiting-camp of 
  us and ours and all,





  Of our corps and generals all, and the President over the 
  corps and generals all,


  And of each of us, O soldiers, and of each and all in the 
  ranks we fight,

(There without hatred we shall all meet.)



  For presently, O soldiers, we too camp in our place 
  in the bivouac-camps of green; 


  But we need not provide for outposts, nor word for 
  the countersign,

Nor drummer to beat the morning drum.




AS TOILSOME I WANDER'D VIRGINIA'S WOODS.


AS TOILSOME I wander'd Virginia's woods,

  To the music of rustling leaves, kick'd by my feet, (for 
  'twas autumn,)

I mark'd at the foot of a tree the grave of a soldier;

  Mortally wounded he, and buried on the retreat, (easily 
  all could I understand;)


  The halt of a mid-day hour, when up! no time to lose 
  &#8212;yet this sign left,

On a tablet scrawl'd and nail'd on the tree by the grave,


Bold, cautious, true, and my loving comrade.


Long, long I muse, then on my way go wandering;

  Many a changeful season to follow, and many a scene of 
  life; 


  Yet at times through changeful season and scene, abrupt,
  alone, or in the crowded street,


  Comes before me the unknown soldier's grave&#8212;comes 
  the inscription rude in Virginia's woods,



Bold, cautious, true, and my loving comrade.







HYMN OF DEAD SOLDIERS.


ONE breath, O my silent soul,

  A perfum'd thought&#8212;no more I ask, for the sake of all 
  dead soldiers.



Buglers off in my armies!
At present I ask not you to sound;

  Not at the head of my cavalry, all on their spirited 
  horses,


  With their sabres drawn and glist'ning, and carbines 
  clanking by their thighs&#8212;(ah, my brave horse-
  men!


  My handsome, tan-faced horsemen! what life, what joy 
  and pride,

With all the perils, were yours!)


Nor you drummers&#8212;neither at reveille, at dawn,

  Nor the long roll alarming the camp&#8212;nor even the 
  muffled beat for a burial; 


  Nothing from you, this time, O drummers, bearing my 
  warlike drums.




  But aside from these, and the crowd's hurrahs, and 
  the land's congratulations,


  Admitting around me comrades close, unseen by the 
  the rest, and voiceless,


  I chant this chant of my silent soul, in the name of all 
  dead soldiers.




  Faces so pale, with wondrous eyes, very dear, gather 
  closer yet;

Draw close, but speak not.





Phantoms, welcome, divine and tender!

  Invisible to the rest, henceforth become my compan-
  ions; 

Follow me ever! desert me not, while I live.



  Sweet are the blooming cheeks of the living! sweet 
  are the musical voices sounding!

But sweet, ah sweet, are the dead, with their silent eyes.


Dearest comrades! all now is over;
But love is not over&#8212;and what love, O comrades!

  Perfume from battle-fields rising&#8212;up from f&#339;tor 
  arising.



Perfume therefore my chant, O love! immortal Love!
Give me to bathe the memories of all dead soldiers.


Perfume all! make all wholesome!
O love! O chant! solve all with the last chemistry.


Give me exhaustless&#8212;make me a fountain,
That I exhale love from me wherever I go,
For the sake of all dead soldiers.




THE SHIP.
 Lo! THE unbounded sea!

  On its breast a Ship, spreading all her sails&#8212;an ample 
  Ship, carrying even her moonsails; 


  The pennant is flying aloft, as she speeds, she 
  speeds so stately&#8212;below, emulous waves press 
  forward,


  They surround the Ship, with shining curving motions,
  and foam.







A BROADWAY PAGEANT. (RECEPTION JAPANESE EMBASSY, JUNE 16, 1860.)


OVER sea, hither from Niphon,
Courteous, the Princes of Asia, swart-cheek'd princes,
First-comers, guests, two-sworded princes,

  Lesson-giving princes, leaning back in their open ba-
  rouches, bare-headed, impassive,

This day they ride through Manhattan.


Libertad!
I do not know whether others behold what I behold,

  In the procession, along with the Princes of Asia, the 
  errand-bearers,


  Bringing up the rear, hovering above, around, or in the 
  ranks marching; 

But I will sing you a song of what I behold, Libertad.



  When million-footed Manhattan, unpent, descends to 
  its pavements; 


  When the thunder-cracking guns arouse me with the 
  proud roar I love; 


  When the round-mouth'd guns, out of the smoke and 
  smell I love, spit their salutes; 


  When the fire-flashing guns have fully alerted me&#8212; 
  when heaven-clouds canopy my city with a 
  delicate thin haze; 


  When, gorgeous, the countless straight stems, the for-
  ests at the wharves, thicken with colors; 


  When every ship, richly drest, carries her flag at the 
  peak; 


  When pennants trail, and street-festoons hang from the 
  windows; 





  When Broadway is entirely given up to foot-passengers 
  and foot-standers&#8212;when the mass is densest; 


  When the facades of the houses are alive with people&#8212; 
  when eyes gaze, riveted, tens of thousands at a 
  time; 


  When the guests from the islands advance&#8212;when the 
  pageant moves forward, visible; 


  When the summons is made&#8212;when the answer that 
  waited thousands of years, answers; 


  I too, arising, answering, descend to the pavements,
  merge with the crowd, and gaze with them.



Superb-faced Manhattan!

  Comrade Americanos!&#8212;to us, then, at last, the Orient 
  comes.



To us, my city,

  Where our tall-topt marble and iron beauties range on 
  opposite sides&#8212;to walk in the space between,

To-day our Antipodes comes.


The Originatress comes,

  The land of Paradise&#8212;land of the Caucasus&#8212;the nest 
  of birth,


  The nest of languages, the bequeather of poems, the 
  race of eld,


  Florid with blood, pensive, rapt with musings, hot with 
  passion,

Sultry with perfume, with ample and flowing garments,

  With sunburnt visage, with intense soul and glittering 
  eyes.

The race of Brahma comes!



  See, my cantabile! these, and more, are flashing to us 
  from the procession; 


  As it moves, changing, a kaleidoscope divine it moves,
  changing, before us.




  Not the errand-bearing princes, nor the tann'd Japa-
  nee only; 





  Lithe and silent, the Hindoo appears&#8212;the whole Asiatic 
  continent itself appears&#8212;the Past, the dead,


  The murky night-morning of wonder and fable, inscruta-
  ble,


  The envelop'd mysteries, the old and unknown hive-
  bees,


  The North&#8212;the sweltering South&#8212;Assyria&#8212;the 
  Hebrews&#8212;the Ancient of ancients,


  Vast desolated cities&#8212;the gliding Present&#8212;all of 
  these, and more, are in the pageant-procession.



Geography, the world, is in it;

  The Great Sea, the brood of islands, Polynesia, the coast 
  beyond; 


  The coast you, henceforth, are facing&#8212;you Libertad!
  from your Western golden shores; 


  The countries there, with their populations&#8212;the mil-
  lions en-masse, are curiously here; 


  The swarming market places&#8212;the temples, with idols 
  ranged along the sides, or at the end&#8212;bonze,
  brahmin, and lama; 


  The mandarin, farmer, merchant, mechanic, and fisher-
  man; 


  The singing-girl and the dancing-girl&#8212;the ecstatic 
  person&#8212;the divine Buddha; 


  The secluded Emperors&#8212;Confucius himself&#8212;the 
  great poets and heroes&#8212;the warriors, the castes,
  all,


  Trooping up, crowding from all directions&#8212;from the 
  Altay mountains,


  From Thibet&#8212;from the four winding and far-flowing 
  rivers of China,


  From the Southern peninsulas, and the demi-continental 
  islands&#8212;from Malaysia; 


  These, and whatever belongs to them, palpable, show 
  forth to me, and are seiz'd by me,

And I am seiz'd by them, and friendlily held by them,

  Till, as here, them all I chant, Libertad! for themselves 
  and for you.







  For I too, raising my voice, join the ranks of this 
  pageant; 

I am the chanter&#8212;I chant aloud over the pageant;
I chant the world on my Western Sea;

  I chant, copious, the islands beyond, thick as stars in 
  the sky; 


  I chant the new empire, grander than any before&#8212;As 
  in a vision it comes to me; 


  I chant America, the Mistress&#8212;I chant a greater su-
  premacy; 


  I chant, projected, a thousand blooming cities yet, in 
  time, on those groups of sea-islands; 


  I chant my sail-ships and steam-ships threading the ar-
  chipelagoes; 

I chant my stars and stripes fluttering in the wind;

  I chant commerce opening, the sleep of ages having 
  done its work&#8212;races, reborn, refresh'd; 


  Lives, works, resumed&#8212;The object I know not&#8212;but 
  the old, the Asiatic, resumed, as it must be,

Commencing from this day, surrounded by the world.


And you, Libertad of the world!

  You shall sit in the middle, well-pois'd, thousands of 
  years; 


  As to-day, from one side, the Princes of Asia come to 
  you; 


  As to-morrow, from the other side, the Queen of Eng-
  land sends her eldest son to you.



The sign is reversing, the orb is enclosed,
The ring is circled, the journey is done;

  The box-lid is but perceptibly open'd&#8212;nevertheless the 
  perfume pours copiously out of the whole box.



Young Libertad!
With the venerable Asia, the all-mother,

  Be considerate with her, now and ever, hot Libertad&#8212; 
  for you are all; 





  Bend your proud neck to the long-off mother, now 
  sending messages over the archipelagoes to you; 

Bend your proud neck low for once, young Libertad.



  Were the children straying westward so long? so 
  wide the tramping?


  Were the precedent dim ages debouching westward 
  from Paradise so long?


  Were the centuries steadily footing it that way, all the 
  while unknown, for you, for reasons?


  They are justified&#8212;they are accomplish'd&#8212;they shall 
  now be turn'd the other way also, to travel to-
  ward you thence; 


  They shall now also march obediently eastward, for 
  your sake, Libertad.





FLAG OF STARS, THICK-SPRINKLED BUNTING.

FLAG of stars! thick-sprinkled bunting!

  Long yet your road, fateful flag!&#8212;long yet your road,
  and lined with bloody death!

For the prize I see at issue, at last is the world!

  All its ships and shores I see, interwoven with your 
  threads, greedy banner!


  &#8212;Dream'd again the flags of kings, highest borne, to 
  flaunt unrivall'd?


  O hasten, flag of man! O with sure and steady step,
  passing highest flags of kings,


  Walk supreme to the heavens, mighty symbol&#8212;run up 
  above them all,

Flag of stars! thick sprinkled bunting!






OLD IRELAND.


FAR hence, amid an isle of wondrous beauty,
Crouching over a grave, an ancient sorrowful mother,

  Once a queen&#8212;now lean and tatter'd, seated on the 
  ground,


  Her old white hair drooping dishevel'd round her shoul-
  ders; 

At her feet fallen an unused royal harp,

  Long silent&#8212;she too long silent&#8212;mourning her shroud-
  ed hope and heir; 


  Of all the earth her heart most full of sorrow, because 
  most full of love.



Yet a word, ancient mother;

  You need crouch there no longer on the cold ground,
  with forehead between your knees; 


  O you need not sit there, veil'd in your old white 
  hair, so dishevel'd; 

For know you, the one you mourn is not in that grave;

  It was an illusion&#8212;the heir, the son you love, was not 
  really dead; 


  The Lord is not dead&#8212;he is risen again, young and 
  strong, in another country; 


  Even while you wept there by your fallen harp, by the 
  grave,


  What you wept for, was translated, pass'd from the 
  grave,

The winds favor'd, and the sea sail'd it,
And now with rosy and new blood,
Moves to-day in a new country.




LOOK DOWN FAIR MOON.

LOOK down, fair moon, and bathe this scene;

  Pour softly down night's nimbus floods, on faces ghast-
  ly, swollen, purple; 

On the dead, on their backs, with their arms toss'd wide,
Pour down your unstinted nimbus, sacred moon.






OUT OF THE ROLLING OCEAN, THE CROWD.

1

  OUT of the rolling ocean, the crowd, came a drop gently 
  to me,

Whispering, I love you, before long I die,

I have travel'd a long way, merely to look on you, to touch you,

For I could not die till I once look'd on you,

For I fear'd I might afterward lose you.


2
(Now we have met, we have look'd, we are safe;
Return in peace to the ocean my love;

  I too am part of that ocean, my love&#8212;we are not so 
  much separated; 


  Behold the great rondure&#8212;the cohesion of all, how per-
  fect!


  But as for me, for you, the irresistible sea is to separ-
  ate us,


  As for an hour carrying us diverse&#8212;yet cannot carry 
  us diverse for ever; 


  Be not impatient&#8212;a little space&#8212;know you, I salute 
  the air, the ocean and the land,

Every day, at sundown, for your dear sake, my love.)




WORLD, TAKE GOOD NOTICE.

WORLD, take good notice, silver stars fading,
Milky hue ript, weft of white detaching,
Coals thirty-six, baleful and burning,
Scarlet, significant, hands off warning,
Now and henceforth flaunt from these shores.






I SAW OLD GENERAL AT BAY.
I saw old General at bay;

  (Old as he was, his grey eyes yet shone out in battle 
  like stars;)


  His small force was now completely hemmed in, in his 
  works; 


  He call'd for volunteers to run the enemy's lines&#8212;a 
  desperate emergency; 


  I saw a hundred and more step forth from the ranks&#8212; 
  but two or three were selected; 


  I saw them receive their orders aside&#8212;they listen'd 
  with care&#8212;the adjutant was very grave; 


  I saw them depart with cheerfulness, freely risking their 
  lives.




OTHERS MAY PRAISE WHAT THEY LIKE.

OTHERS may praise what they like;

  But I, from the banks of the running Missouri, praise 
  nothing, in art, or aught else,


  Till it has breathed well the atmosphere of this river&#8212; 
  also the western prairie-scent,

And fully exudes it again.



SOLID, IRONICAL, ROLLING ORB.

SOLID, ironical, rolling orb!

  Master of all, and matter of fact!&#8212;at last I accept your 
  terms; 


  Bringing to practical, vulgar tests, of all my ideal 
  dreams,

And of me, as lover and hero.






HUSH'D BE THE CAMPS TO-DAY. A. L. BURIED APRIL 19, 1865.

HUSH'D be the camps to-day;
And, soldiers, let us drape our war-worn weapons;
And each, with musing soul retire, to celebrate,
Our dear commander's death.


No more for him life's stormy conflicts;
Nor victory, nor defeat&#8212;No more time's dark events,
Charging like ceaseless clouds across the sky.


But sing, poet, in our name;

  Sing of the love we bore him&#8212;because you, dweller in 
  camps, know it truly.



Sing, to the lower'd coffin there;

  Sing, with the shovel'd clods that fill the grave&#8212;a 
  verse,

For the heavy hearts of soldiers.




WEAVE IN, WEAVE IN, MY HARDY LIFE.

WEAVE in! weave in, my hardy life!

  Weave, weave a soldier strong and full, for great cam-
  paigns to come; 


  Weave in red blood! weave sinews in, like ropes! the 
  senses, sight weave in!


  Weave lasting sure! weave day and night the weft, the 
  warp! incessant weave! tire not!


  (We know not what the use, O life! nor know the aim,
  the end&#8212;nor really aught we know; 


  But know the work, the need goes on, and shall go 
  on&#8212;the death-envelop'd march of peace as well 
  as war, goes on;)


  For great campaigns of peace the same, the wiry 
  threads to weave; 

We know not why or what, yet weave, forever weave.






TURN O LIBERTAD.

TURN, O Libertad, no more doubting;

  Turn from lands retrospective, recording proofs of the 
  past; 


  From the singers that sing the trailing glories of the 
  past; 


  From the chants of the feudal world&#8212;the triumphs of 
  kings, slavery, caste; 


  Turn to the world, the triumphs reserv'd and to come&#8212; 
  give up that backward world; 


  Leave to the singers of hitherto&#8212;give them the trailing 
  past: 


  But what remains, remains for singers for you&#8212;wars 
  to come are for you; 


  (Lo! how the wars of the past have duly inured to you 
  &#8212;and the wars of the present shall also inure:)


  &#8212;Then turn, and be not alarm'd, O Libertad&#8212;turn 
  your undying face,

To where the future, greater than all the past,
Is swiftly, surely preparing for you.



BIVOUAC ON A MOUNTAIN SIDE.

I SEE before me now, a traveling army halting;

  Below, a fertile valley spread, with barns, and the orch-
  ards of summer; 


  Behind, the terraced sides of a mountain, abrupt in 
  places, rising high; 


  Broken, with rocks, with clinging cedars, with tall 
  shapes, dingily seen; 


  The numerous camp-fires scatter'd near and far, some 
  away up on the mountain; 


  The shadowy forms of men and horses, looming, large-
  sized, flickering; 


  And over all, the sky&#8212;the sky! far, far out of reach,
  studded with the eternal stars.







PENSIVE ON HER DEAD GAZING, I HEARD THE MOTHER OF ALL.

PENSIVE, on her dead gazing, I heard the Mother of All,

  Desperate, on the torn bodies, on the forms covering the 
  battle-fields gazing; 


  As she call'd to her earth with mournful voice while she 
  stalk'd: 


  Absorb them well, O my earth, she cried&#8212;I charge you,
  lose not my sons! lose not an atom; 


  And you streams, absorb them well, taking their dear 
  blood; 


  And you local spots, and you airs that swim above 
  lightly,


  And all you essences of soil and growth&#8212;and you, O 
  my rivers' depths; 


  And you mountain sides&#8212;and the woods where my 
  dear children's blood, trickling, redden'd; 


  And you trees, down in your roots, to bequeath to all 
  future trees,


  My dead absorb&#8212;my young men's beautiful bodies ab-
  sorb&#8212;and their precious, precious, precious 
  blood; 


  Which holding in trust for me, faithfully back again give 
  me, many a year hence,


  In unseen essence and odor of surface and grass, centu-
  ries hence; 


  In blowing airs from the fields, back again give me my 
  darlings&#8212;give my immortal heroes; 


  Exhale me them centuries hence&#8212;breathe me their 
  breath&#8212;let not an atom be lost; 


  O years and graves! O air and soil! O my dead, an 
  aroma sweet!


  Exhale them perennial, sweet death, years, centuries 
  hence.







NOT YOUTH PERTAINS TO ME.

NOT youth pertains to me,
Nor delicatesse&#8212;I cannot beguile the time with talk;
Awkward in the parlor, neither a dancer nor elegant;

  In the learn'd coterie sitting constrain'd and still&#8212;for 
  learning inures not to me; 


  Beauty, knowledge, fortune, inure not to me&#8212;yet 
  there are two things inure to me; 


  I have nourish'd the wounded, and sooth'd many a 
  dying soldier; 

And at intervals I have strung together a few songs,
Fit for war, and the life of the camp.


 FINIS. 









SEQUEL TO DRUM-TAPS.

(SINCE THE PRECEDING CAME FROM THE PRESS.)
WHEN LILACS LAST IN THE DOOR-YARD BLOOM'D.
AND OTHER PIECES.

WASHINGTON.
1865-6.






CONTENTS.



When Lilacs last in the door-yard bloom'd.........
 3


Race of Veterans..................................
 12


O Captain! my Captain!............................
 13


Spirit whose work is done.........................
 14


Chanting the Square Deific........................
 15


I heard you, solemn sweet pipes of the Organ......
 17


Not my Enemies ever invade me.....................
 17


O me! O life!.....................................
 18


Ah poverties, wincings, and sulky retreats........
 18


As I lay with my head in your lap, Camerado.......
 19


This day, O Soul..................................
 19


In clouds descending, in midnight sleep...........
 20


An Army on the march..............................
 20


Dirge for Two Veterans............................
 21


How solemn, as one by one.........................
 22


Lo! Victress on the Peaks!........................
 23


Reconciliation....................................
 23


To the leaven'd Soil they trod....................
 24










WHEN LILACS LAST IN THE DOOR-YARD BLOOM'D.

1

WHEN lilacs last in the door-yard bloom'd,

  And the great star early droop'd in the western sky in the 
  night,


  I mourn'd&#8230;and yet shall mourn with ever-returning 
  spring.



O ever-returning spring! trinity sure to me you bring;
Lilac blooming perennial, and drooping star in the west,
And thought of him I love.



2

O powerful, western, fallen star!
O shades of night! O moody, tearful night!

  O great star disappear'd! O the blank murk that hides the 
  star!


  O cruel hands that hold me powerless! O helpless soul of 
  me!

O harsh surrounding cloud that will not free my soul!



3


  In the door-yard fronting an old farm-house, near the 
  white-wash'd palings,


  Stands the lilac bush, tall-growing, with heart-shaped leaves 
  of rich green,


  With many a pointed blossom, rising, delicate, with the 
  perfume strong I love,





  With every leaf a miracle&#8230;&#8230;and from this bush in the 
  door-yard,


  With its delicate-color'd blossoms, and heart-shaped leaves 
  of rich green,

A sprig, with its flower, I break.



4

In the swamp, in secluded recesses,
A shy and hidden bird is warbling a song.


Solitary, the thrush,
The hermit, withdrawn to himself, avoiding the settlements,
Sings by himself a song.


Song of the bleeding throat!
Death's outlet song of life&#8212;(for well, dear brother, I know,
If thou wast not gifted to sing, thou would'st surely die.)



5

Over the breast of the spring, the land, amid cities,

  Amid lanes, and through old woods, (where lately the 
  violets peep'd from the ground, spotting the gray 
  debris;)


  Amid the grass in the fields each side of the lanes&#8212;passing 
  the endless grass; 


  Passing the yellow-spear'd wheat, every grain from its 
  shroud in the dark-brown fields uprising; 


  Passing the apple-tree blows of white and pink in the 
  orchards; 

Carrying a corpse to where it shall rest in the grave,
Night and day journeys a coffin.



6

Coffin that passes through lanes and streets,

  Through day and night, with the great cloud darkening the 
  land,


  With the pomp of the inloop'd flags, with the cities draped 
  in black,





  With the show of the States themselves, as of crape-veil'd 
  women, standing,


  With processions long and winding, and the flambeaus of 
  the night,


  With the countless torches lit&#8212;with the silent sea of faces,
  and the unbared heads,


  With the waiting depot, the arriving coffin, and the sombre 
  faces,


  With dirges through the night, with the thousand voices 
  rising strong and solemn; 


  With all the mournful voices of the dirges, pour'd around 
  the coffin,


  The dim-lit churches and the shuddering organs&#8212;Where 
  amid these you journey,

With the tolling, tolling bells' perpetual clang;
Here! coffin that slowly passes.
I give you my sprig of lilac.



7

(Nor for you, for one, alone;
Blossoms and branches green to coffins all I bring:

  For fresh as the morning&#8212;thus would I chant a song for 
  you, O sane and sacred death.



All over bouquets of roses,
O death! I cover you over with roses and early lilies;
But mostly and now the lilac that blooms the first,
Copious, I break, I break the sprigs from the bushes:
With loaded arms I come, pouring for you,
For you and the coffins all of you, O death.)



8

O western orb, sailing the heaven!

  Now I know what you must have meant, as a month since 
  we walk'd,

As we walk'd up and down in the dark blue so mystic,
As we walk'd in silence the transparent shadowy night,




  As I saw you had something to tell, as you bent to me night 
  after night,


  As you droop'd from the sky low down, as if to my side,
  (while the other stars all look'd on;)


  As we wander'd together the solemn night, (for something 
  I know not what, kept me from sleep;)


  As the night advanced, and I saw on the rim of the west,
  ere you went, how full you were of woe; 


  As I stood on the rising ground in the breeze, in the cool 
  transparent night,


  As I watch'd where you pass'd and was lost in the nether-
  ward black of the night,


  As my soul, in its trouble, dissatisfied, sank, as where you,
  sad orb,

Concluded, dropt in the night, and was gone.



9

Sing on, there in the swamp!

  O singer bashful and tender! I hear your notes&#8212;I hear 
  your call; 

I hear&#8212;I come presently&#8212;I understand you;

  But a moment I linger&#8212;for the lustrous star has detain'd 
  me; 

The star, my comrade, departing, holds and detains me.



10


  O how shall I warble myself for the dead one there I 
  loved?


  And how shall I deck my song for the large sweet soul that 
  has gone?

And what shall my perfume be, for the grave of him I love?


Sea-winds, blown from east and west,

  Blown from the eastern sea, and blown from the western sea,
  till there on the prairies meeting: 

These, and with these, and the breath of my chant,
I perfume the grave of him I love.






11

O what shall I hang on the chamber walls?
And what shall the pictures be that I hang on the walls,
To adorn the burial-house of him I love?


Pictures of growing spring, and farms, and homes,

  With the Fourth-month eve at sundown, and the gray-smoke 
  lucid and bright,


  With floods of the yellow gold of the gorgeous, indolent,
  sinking sun, burning, expanding the air; 


  With the fresh sweet herbage under foot, and the pale green 
  leaves of the trees prolific; 


  In the distance the flowing glaze, the breast of the river,
  with a wind-dapple here and there; 


  With ranging hills on the banks, with many a line against 
  the sky, and shadows; 


  And the city at hand, with dwellings so dense, and stacks 
  of chimneys,


  And all the scenes of life, and the workshops, and the 
  workmen homeward returning.




12

Lo! body and soul! this land!

  Mighty Manhattan, with spires, and the sparkling and hur-
  rying tides, and the ships; 


  The varied and ample land&#8212;the South and the North in 
  the light&#8212;Ohio's shores, and flashing Missouri,


  And ever the far-spreading prairies, cover'd with grass and 
  corn.



Lo! the most excellent sun, so calm and haughty;
The violet and purple morn, with just-felt breezes:
The gentle, soft-born, measureless light;
The miracle, spreading, bathing all&#8212;the fulfill'd noon;

  The coming eve, delicious&#8212;the welcome night, and the 
  stars,

Over my cities shining all, enveloping man and land.






13

Sing on! sing on, you gray-brown bird!

  Sing from the swamps, the recesses&#8212;pour your chant from 
  the bushes; 

Limitless out of the dusk, out of the cedars and pines.


Sing on, dearest brother&#8212;warble your reedy song;
Loud human song, with voice of uttermost woe.


O liquid, and free, and tender!
O wild and loose to my soul! O wondrous singer!

  You only I hear&#8230;&#8230;yet the star holds me, (but will soon 
  depart;)

Yet the lilac, with mastering odor, holds me.



14

Now while I sat in the day, and look'd forth,         
  
  In the close of the day, with its light, and the fields of 
  spring, and the farmer preparing his crops,


  In the large unconscious scenery of my land, with its lakes 
  and forests,


  In the heavenly aerial beauty, (after the perturb'd winds,
  and the storms;)


  Under the arching heavens of the afternoon swift passing,
  and the voices of children and women,


  The many-moving sea-tides,&#8212;and I saw the ships how they 
  sail'd,


  And the summer approaching with richness, and the fields 
  all busy with labor,


  And the infinite separate houses, how they all went on, each 
  with its meals and minutia of daily usages; 


  And the streets, how their throbbings throbb'd, and the cities 
  pent,&#8212;lo! then and there,


  Falling among them all, and upon them all, enveloping me 
  with the rest,

Appear'd the cloud, appear'd the long black trail;

  And I knew Death, its thought, and the sacred knowledge 
  of death.







15


  Then with the knowledge of death as walking one side of 
  me,

And the thought of death close-walking the other side of me,

  And I in the middle, as with companions, and as holding the 
  hands of companions,

I fled forth to the hiding receiving night, that talks not,

  Down to the shores of the water, the path by the swamp in 
  the dimness,

To the solemn shadowy cedars, and ghostly pines so still.


And the singer so shy to the rest receiv'd me;
The gray-brown bird I know, receiv'd us comrades three;

  And he sang what seem'd the song of death, and a verse for 
  him I love.



From deep secluded recesses,
From the fragrant cedars, and the ghostly pines so still,
Came the singing of the bird.


And the charm of the singing rapt me,
As I held, as if by their hands, my comrades in the night;
And the voice of my spirit tallied the song of the bird.



16

Come, lovely and soothing Death,
Undulate round the world, serenely arriving, arriving,
In the day, in the night, to all, to each,
Sooner or later, delicate Death.


Prais'd be the fathomless universe,
For life and joy, and for objects and knowledge curious;
And for love, sweet love&#8212;But praise! O praise and praise,
For the sure-enwinding arms of cool-enfolding Death.


Dark Mother, always gliding near, with soft feet,
Have none chanted for thee a chant of fullest welcome?



Then I chant it for thee&#8212;I glorify thee above all;

  I bring thee a song that when thou must indeed come, come 
  unfalteringly.



Approach, encompassing Death&#8212;strong Deliveress!

  When it is so&#8212;when thou hast taken them, I joyously sing 
  the dead,

Lost in the loving, floating ocean of thee,
Laved in the flood of thy bliss, O Death.


From me to thee glad serenades,

  Dances for thee I propose, saluting thee&#8212;adornments and 
  feastings for thee; 


  And the sights of the open landscape, and the high-spread 
  sky, are fitting,

And life and the fields, and the huge and thoughtful night.


The night, in silence, under many a star;

  The ocean shore, and the husky whispering wave, whose 
  voice I know; 

And the soul turning to thee, O vast and well-veil'd Death,
And the body gratefully nestling close to thee.


Over the tree-tops I float thee a song!

  Over the rising and sinking waves&#8212;over the myriad fields,
  and the prairies wide; 


  Over the dense-pack'd cities all, and the teeming wharves 
  and ways,

I float this carol with joy, with joy to thee, O Death!



17

To the tally of my soul,
Loud and strong kept up the gray-brown bird,
With pure, deliberate notes, spreading, filling the night.


Loud in the pines and cedars dim,
Clear in the freshness moist, and the swamp-perfume;
And I with my comrades there in the night.





While my sight that was bound in my eyes unclosed,
As to long panoramas of visions.



18

I saw the vision of armies;
And I saw, as in noiseless dreams, hundreds of battle-flags;

  Borne through the smoke of the battles, and pierc'd with 
  missiles, I saw them,


  And carried hither and yon through the smoke, and torn 
  and bloody; 


  And at last but a few shreds of the flags left on the staffs,
  (and all in silence,)

And the staffs all splinter'd and broken.


I saw battle-corpses, myriads of them,
And the white skeletons of young men&#8212;I saw them;
I saw the debris and debris of all dead soldiers;
But I saw they were not as was thought;
They themselves were fully at rest&#8212;they suffer'd not;
The living remain'd and suffer'd&#8212;the mother suffer'd,

  And the wife and the child, and the musing comrade suf-
  fer'd,

And the armies that remain'd suffer'd.



19

Passing the visions, passing the night;
Passing, unloosing the hold of my comrades' hands;

  Passing the song of the hermit bird, and the tallying song 
  of my soul,


  Victorious song, death's outlet song, (yet varying, ever-
  altering song,


  As low and wailing, yet clear the notes, rising and falling,
  flooding the night,


  Sadly sinking and fainting, as warning and warning, and 
  yet again bursting with joy,)

Covering the earth, and filling the spread of the heaven,
As that powerful psalm in the night I heard from recesses.






20

Must I leave thee, lilac with heart-shaped leaves?

  Must I leave thee there in the door-yard, blooming, return-
  ing with spring?



Must I pass from my song for thee;

  From my gaze on thee in the west, fronting the west, com-
  muning with thee,

O comrade lustrous, with silver face in the night?



21

Yet each I keep, and all;
The song, the wondrous chant of the gray-brown bird, I keep,
And the tallying chant, the echo arous'd in my soul, I keep,

  With the lustrous and drooping star, with the countenance 
  full of woe; 

With the lilac tall, and its blossoms of mastering odor;

  Comrades mine, and I in the midst, and their memory ever 
  I keep&#8212;for the dead I loved so well; 


  For the sweetest, wisest soul of all my days and lands&#8230; 
  and this for his dear sake; 

Lilac and star and bird, twined with the chant of my soul,

  With the holders holding my hand, nearing the call of the 
  bird,

There in the fragrant pines, and the cedars dusk and dim.





RACE OF VETERANS.

RACE of veterans!

  Race of the soil, ready for conflict! race of the conquering 
  march!

(No more credulity's race, abiding-temper'd race;)
Race owning no law but the law of itself;
Race of passion and the storm.






O CAPTAIN! MY CAPTAIN!

1
O CAPTAIN! my captain! our fearful trip is done;

  The ship has weather'd every rack, the prize we sought is 
  won;

The port is near, the bells I hear, the people all exulting,
While follow eyes the steady keel, the vessel grim and daring:
But O heart! heart! heart!
Leave you not the little spot,
Where on the deck my captain lies.
Fallen cold and dead.


2
O captain! my captain! rise up and hear the bells;
Rise up&#8212;for you the flag is flung&#8212;for you the bugle trills;

  For you bouquets and ribbon'd wreaths&#8212;for you the shores 
  a-crowding; 


  For you they call, the swaying mass, their eager faces 
  turning; 

O captain! dear father!
This arm I push beneath you;
It is some dream that on the deck,
You've fallen cold and dead.


3
My captain does not answer, his lips are pale and still;
My father does not feel my arm, he has no pulse nor will:

  But the ship, the ship is anchor'd safe, its voyage closed and
  done; 

From fearful trip, the victor ship, comes in with object won:
Exult, O shores, and ring, O bells!
But I, with silent tread,
Walk the spot my captain lies,
Fallen cold and dead.







SPIRIT WHOSE WORK IS DONE.

SPIRIT whose work is done! spirit of dreadful hours!
Ere, departing, fade from my eyes your forests of bayonets;

  Spirit of gloomiest fears and doubts, (yet onward ever unfal-
  tering pressing;)


  Spirit of many a solemn day, and many a savage scene!
  Electric spirit!


  That with muttering voice, through the years now closed,
  like a tireless phantom flitted,


  Rousing the land with breath of flame, while you beat and 
  beat the drum; 


  &#8212;Now, as the sound of the drum, hollow and harsh to the 
  last, reverberates round me; 


  As your ranks, your immortal ranks, return, return from 
  the battles; 


  While the muskets of the young men yet lean over their 
  shoulders; 

While I look on the bayonets bristling over their shoulders;

  While those slanted bayonets, whole forests of them, ap-
  pearing in the distance, approach and pass on, re-
  turning homeward,


  Moving with steady motion, swaying to and fro, to the right 
  and left,

Evenly, lightly rising and falling, as the steps keep time:

  &#8212;Spirit of hours I knew, all hectic red one day, but pale as 
  death next day; 

Touch my mouth, ere you depart&#8212;press my lips close!

  Leave me your pulses of rage! bequeath them to me! fill 
  me with currents convulsive!


  Let them scorch and blister out of my chants, when you are 
  gone; 

Let them identify you to the future in these songs.






CHANTING THE SQUARE DEIFIC.

1

  CHANTING the square deific, out of the One advancing, out 
  of the sides; 

Out of the old and new&#8212;out of the square entirely divine,

  Solid, four-sided, (all the sides needed)&#8230;from this side 
  JEHOVAH am I,

Old Brahm I, and I Saturnius am;
Not Time affects me&#8212;I am Time, modern as any;
Unpersuadable, relentless, executing righteous judgments;
As the Earth, the Father, the brown old Kronos, with laws,

  Aged beyond computation&#8212;yet ever new&#8212;ever with those 
  mighty laws rolling,


  Relentless, I forgive no man&#8212;whoever sins, dies&#8212;I will 
  have that man's life; 


  Therefore let none expect mercy&#8212;Have the seasons, gravi-
  tation, the appointed days, mercy?&#8212;No more have I; 


  But as the seasons, and gravitation&#8212;and as all the appointed 
  days, that forgive not,


  I dispense from this side judgments inexorable, without the 
  least remorse.



2
Consolator most mild, the promis'd one advancing,
With gentle hand extended, the mightier God am I,

  Foretold by prophets and poets, in their most rapt proph-
  ecies and poems; 


  From this side, lo! the Lord CHRIST gazes&#8212;lo! Hermes I&#8212; 
  lo! mine is Hercules' face; 

All sorrow, labor, suffering, I, tallying it, absorb in myself;

  Many times have I been rejected, taunted, put in prison,
  and crucified&#8212;and many times shall be again; 


  All the world have I given up for my dear brothers' and 
  sisters' sake&#8212;for the soul's sake; 





  Wending my way through the homes of men, rich or 
  poor, with the kiss of affection; 


  For I am affection&#8212;I am the cheer-bringing God, with hope,
  and all-enclosing Charity; 


  (Conqueror yet&#8212;for before me all the armies and soldiers 
  of the earth shall yet bow&#8212;and all the weapons of 
  war become impotent:)


  With indulgent words, as to children&#8212;with fresh and sane 
  words, mine only; 


  Young and strong I pass, knowing well I am destin'd my-
  self to an early death: 


  But my Charity has no death&#8212;my Wisdom dies not, neither 
  early nor late,


  And my sweet Love, bequeath'd here and elsewhere, never 
  dies.



3
Aloof, dissatisfied, plotting revolt,
Comrade of criminals, brother of slaves,
Crafty, despised, a drudge, ignorant,

  With sudra face and worn brow&#8212;black, but in the depths 
  of my heart, proud as any; 


  Lifted, now and always, against whoever, scorning, assumes 
  to rule me; 


  Morose, full of guile, full of reminiscences, brooding, with 
  many wiles,


  (Though it was thought I was baffled and dispell'd, and 
  my wiles done&#8212;but that will never be;)


  Defiant, I, SATAN, still live&#8212;still utter words&#8212;in new lands 
  duly appearing, (and old ones also;)


  Permanent here, from my side, warlike, equal with any,
  real as any,

Nor time, nor change, shall ever change me or my words.


4
Santa SPIRITA, breather, life,
Beyond the light, lighter than light,
Beyond the flames of hell&#8212;joyous, leaping easily above hell;



Beyond Paradise&#8212;perfumed solely with mine own perfume;

  Including all life on earth&#8212;touching, including God&#8212; 
  including Saviour and Satan; 


  Ethereal, pervading all, (for without me, what were all?
  what were God?)


  Essence of forms&#8212;life of the real identities, permanent,
  positive, (namely the unseen,)


  Life of the great round world, the sun and stars, and of 
  man&#8212;I, the general Soul,

Here the square finishing, the solid, I the most solid,
Breathe my breath also through these little songs.




I HEARD YOU, SOLEMN-SWEET PIPES OF THE ORGAN.

  I HEARD you, solemn-sweet pipes of the organ, as last 
  Sunday morn I pass'd the church; 


  Winds of autumn!&#8212;as I walk'd the woods at dusk, I 
  heard your long-stretch'd sighs, up above, so 
  mournful; 


  I heard the perfect Italian tenor, singing at the opera&#8212;I 
  heard the soprano in the midst of the quartet singing; 


  &#8230;Heart of my love!&#8212;you too I heard, murmuring low,
  through one of the wrists around my head; 


  Heard the pulse of you, when all was still, ringing little 
  bells last night under my ear.




NOT MY ENEMIES EVER INVADE ME.

  NOT my enemies ever invade me&#8212;no harm to my pride from 
  them I fear; 

But the lovers I recklessly love&#8212;lo! how they master me!
Lo! me, ever open and helpless, bereft of my strength!
Utterly abject, grovelling on the ground before them.






O ME! O LIFE!


O ME! O life!&#8230;of the questions of these recurring;

  Of the endless trains of the faithless&#8212;of cities fill'd with 
  the foolish; 


  Of myself forever reproaching myself, (for who more fool-
  ish than I, and who more faithless?)


  Of eyes that vainly crave the light&#8212;of the objects mean&#8212;of 
  the struggle ever renew'd; 


  Of the poor results of all&#8212;of the plodding and sordid crowds 
  I see around me; 


  Of the empty and useless years of the rest&#8212;with the rest me 
  intertwined; 


  The question, O me! so sad, recurring&#8212;What good amid 
  these, O me, O life?




Answer.
That you are here&#8212;that life exists, and identity;

  That the powerful play goes on, and you will contribute a 
  verse.





AH POVERTIES, WINCINGS, AND SULKY RETREATS.

AH poverties, wincings, and sulky retreats!
Ah you foes that in conflict have overcome me!

  (For what is my life, or any man's life, but a conflict with 
  foes&#8212;the old, the incessant war?)

You degradations&#8212;you tussle with passions and appetites;

  You smarts from dissatisfied friendships, (ah wounds, the 
  sharpest of all;)


  You toil of painful and choked articulations&#8212;you mean-
  nesses; 


  You shallow tongue-talks at tables, (my tongue the shal-
  lowest of any;)


  You broken resolutions, you racking angers, you smother'd 
  ennuis; 


  Ah, think not you finally triumph&#8212;My real self has yet to 
  come forth; 

It shall yet march forth o'ermastering, till all lies beneath me;
It shall yet stand up the soldier of unquestion'd victory.






AS I LAY WITH MY HEAD IN YOUR LAP, CAMERADO.
As I lay with my head in your lap, camerado,

  The confession I made I resume&#8212;what I said to you and 
  the open air I resume: 

I know I am restless, and make others so;
I know my words are weapons, full of danger, full of death;
(Indeed I am myself the real soldier;

  It is not he, there, with his bayonet, and not the red-striped 
  artilleryman;)


  For I confront peace, security, and all the settled laws, to 
  unsettle them; 


  I am more resolute because all have denied me, than I could 
  ever have been had all accepted me; 


  I heed not, and have never heeded, either experience, cau-
  tions, majorities, nor ridicule; 


  And the threat of what is call'd hell is little or nothing to 
  me; 


  And the lure of what is call'd heaven is little or nothing 
  to me; 


  &#8230;Dear camerado! I confess I have urged you onward 
  with me, and still urge you, without the least idea 
  what is our destination,


  Or whether we shall be victorious, or utterly quell'd and 
  defeated.




THIS DAY, O SOUL.

THIS day, O soul, I give you a wondrous mirror;

  Long in the dark, in tarnish and cloud it lay&#8212;But the cloud 
  has pass'd, and the tarnish gone; 

&#8230;Behold, O soul! it is now a clean and bright mirror,
Faithfully showing you all the things of the world.






IN CLOUDS DESCENDING, IN MIDNIGHT SLEEP.

1

  IN clouds descending, in midnight sleep, of many a face of 
  anguish,


  Of the look at first of the mortally wounded&#8212;of that inde-
  scribable look; 

Of the dead on their backs, with arms extended wide,
I dream, I dream, I dream.


2
Of scenes of nature, the fields and the mountains;

  Of the skies, so beauteous after the storm&#8212;and at night the 
  moon so unearthly bright,


  Shining sweetly, shining down, where we dig the trenches 
  and gather the heaps,

I dream, I dream, I dream.


3

  Long have they pass'd, long lapsed&#8212;faces and trenches and 
  fields; 


  Long through the carnage I moved with a callous compos-
  ure&#8212;or away from the fallen,

Onward I sped at the time&#8212;But now of their forms at night,
I dream, I dream, I dream.




AN ARMY ON THE MARCH.

WITH its cloud of skirmishers in advance,

  With now the sound of a single shot, snapping like a whip,
  and now an irregular volley,


  The swarming ranks press on and on, the dense brigades 
  press on; 

Glittering dimly, toiling under the sun, the dust-cover'd men,
In columns rise and fall to the undulations of the ground,

  With artillery interspers'd&#8212;the wheels rumble, the horses 
  sweat,

As the army resistless advances.






DIRGE FOR TWO VETERANS.

1
THE last sunbeam
Lightly falls from the finish'd Sabbath,
On the pavement here&#8212;and there beyond, it is looking,
Down a new-made double grave.



2
Lo! the moon ascending!
Up from the east, the silvery round moon;
Beautiful over the house-tops, ghastly, phantom moon;
Immense and silent moon.



3
I see a sad procession,
And I hear the sound of coming full-key'd bugles;
All the channels of the city streets they're flooding,
As with voices and with tears.



4
I hear the great drums pounding,
And the small drums steady whirring;
And every blow of the great convulsive drums,
Strikes me through and through.



5
For the son is brought with the father;
(In the foremost ranks of the fierce assault they fell;
Two veterans, son and father, dropt together,
And the double grave awaits them.)



6
Now nearer blow the bugles,
And the drums strike more convulsive;
And the day-light o'er the pavement quite has faded,
And the strong dead-march enwraps me.





7
In the eastern sky up-buoying,
The sorrowful vast phantom moves illumin'd;
('T is some mother's large, transparent face,
In heaven brighter growing.)



8
O strong dead-march, you please me!
O moon immense, with your silvery face you soothe me!
O my soldiers twain! O my veterans, passing to burial!
What I have I also give you.



9
The moon gives you light,
And the bugles and the drums give you music;
And my heart, O my soldiers, my veterans,
My heart gives you love.





HOW SOLEMN, AS ONE BY ONE.
 How solemn, as one by one,

  As the ranks returning, all worn and sweaty&#8212;as the men 
  file by where I stand; 


  As the faces, the masks appear&#8212;as I glance at the faces,
  studying the masks; 


  (As I glance upward out of this page, studying you, dear 
  friend, whoever you are;)


  How solemn the thought of my whispering soul, to each in 
  the ranks, and to you; 

I see behind each mask, that wonder, a kindred soul:

  O the bullet could never kill what you really are, dear 
  friend,


  Nor the bayonet stab what you really are: 
  &#8230;The soul! yourself I see, great as any, good as the best,


  Waiting secure and content, which the bullet could never 
  kill,

Nor the bayonet stab, O friend!






LO! VICTRESS ON THE PEAKS!
 Lo! Victress on the peaks!

  Where thou standest, with mighty brow, regarding the 
  world,

(The world, O Libertad, that vainly conspired against thee;)

  Out of its countless, beleaguering toils, after thwarting 
  them all; 

Where thou, dominant, with the dazzling sun around thee,

  Towerest now unharm'd, in immortal soundness and bloom&#8212; 
  lo! in this hour supreme,


  No poem proud I, chanting, bring to thee&#8212;nor mastery's 
  rapturous verse; 


  But a little book, containing night's darkness, and blood-
  dripping wounds,

And psalms of the dead.



RECONCILIATION.

WORD over all, beautiful as the sky!

  Beautiful that war, and all its deeds of carnage, must in 
  time be utterly lost; 


  That the hands of the sisters Death and Night, incessantly 
  softly wash again, and ever again, this soil'd world: 

&#8230;For my enemy is dead&#8212;a man divine as myself is dead;

  I look where he lies, white-faced and still, in the coffin&#8212;I 
  draw near; 


  I bend down and touch lightly with my lips the white face 
  in the coffin.







TO THE LEAVEN'D SOIL THEY TROD.
To the leaven'd soil they trod, calling, I sing, for the last;
(Not cities, nor man alone, nor war, nor the dead,

  But forth from my tent emerging for good&#8212;loosing, unty-
  ing the tent-ropes;)


  In the freshness, the forenoon air, in the far-stretching cir-
  cuits and vistas, again to peace restored,


  To the fiery fields emanative, and the endless vistas beyond&#8212; 
  to the south and the north; 


  To the leaven'd soil of the general western world, to attest 
  my songs,


  (To the average earth, the wordless earth, witness of war 
  and peace,)

To the Alleghanian hills, and the tireless Mississippi,
To the rocks I, calling, sing, and all the trees in the woods,

  To the plain of the poems of heroes, to the prairie spreading 
  wide,


  To the far-off sea, and the unseen winds, and the sane im-
  palpable air; 

&#8230;And responding, they answer all, (but not in words.)

  The average earth, the witness of war and peace, acknowl-
  edges mutely; 


  The prairie draws me close, as the father, to bosom broad,
  the son; 


  The Northern ice and rain, that began me, nourish me 
  to the end; 

But the hot sun of the South is to ripen my songs.


 FINIS. 









LEAVES OF GRASS.

SONGS BEFORE PARTING.





CONTENTS.



As I sat Alone by Blue Ontario's shore.........................
 4




LEAVES OF GRASS


"O me, man of slack faith so long!"............................
 22


"Forms, qualities, lives, humanity, languages, thoughts".......
 23


"Now I make a leaf of Voices"..................................
&#8212;


"What am I, after all, but a child"............................
 24


"Locations and times&#8212;what is it in me that meets them"...
&#8212;


THOUGHTS


"Of these years I sing"........................................
 25


"Of seeds dropping into the ground"............................
 26


As Nearing Departure...........................................
 27


As I walk, Solitary, Unattended................................
 28


Song at Sunset.................................................
 29


To a Historian.................................................
 31


Assurances.....................................................
 32


So Long!.......................................................
 33











AS I SAT ALONE BY BLUE ONTARIO'S SHORE.

1

As I sat alone, by blue Ontario's shore,

  As I mused of these mighty days, and of peace re-
  turn'd, and the dead that return no more,


  A Phantom, gigantic, superb, with stern visage, ac-
  cost'd me; 


  Chant me a poem, it said, of the range of the high Soul 
  of Poets, 


  And chant of the welcome bards that breathe but my 
  native air&#8212;invoke those bards; 


  And chant me, before you go, the Song of the throes of 
  Democracy.




  (Democracy&#8212;the destined conqueror&#8212;yet treacher-
  ous lip-smiles everywhere,

And Death and infidelity at every step.)



2

A nation announcing itself,

  I myself make the only growth by which I can be ap-
  preciated,


  I reject none, accept all, then reproduce all in my own 
  forms.






A breed whose proof is in time and deeds;

  What we are, we are&#8212;nativity is answer enough to 
  objections; 

We wield ourselves as a weapon is wielded,
We are powerful and tremendous in ourselves,

  We are executive in ourselves&#8212;We are sufficient in the 
  variety of ourselves,


  We are the most beautiful to ourselves, and in our-
  selves; 


  We stand self-pois'd, in the middle, branching thence 
  over the world; 


  From Missouri, Nebraska, or Kansas, laughing attacks 
  to scorn.



Nothing is sinful to us outside of ourselves,

  Whatever appears, whatever does not appear, we are 
  beautiful or sinful in ourselves only.

(O mother! O sisters dear!
If we are lost, no victor else has destroy'd us;
It is by ourselves we go down to eternal night.)



3


  Have you thought there could be but a single 
  Supreme?


  There can be any number of Supremes&#8212;One does not 
  countervail another, any more than one eye-
  sight countervails another, or one life counter-
  vails another.
          


All is eligible to all,
All is for individuals&#8212;All is for you,
No condition is prohibited, not God's, or any.



  All comes by the body&#8212;only health puts you rapport 
  with the universe.



Produce great persons, the rest follows.






4

America isolated I sing;

  I say that works made here in the spirit of other lands,
  are so much poison to These States.




  How dare these insects assume to write poems for 
  America?

For our armies, and the offspring following the armies.


Piety and conformity to them that like!
Peace, obesity, allegiance, to them that like!
I am he who tauntingly compels men, women, nations,

  Crying, Leap from your seats, and contend for your 
  lives!




  I am he who walks the States with a barbed tongue,
  questioning everyone I meet; 


  Who are you, that wanted only to be told what you 
  knew before?


  Who are you, that wanted only a book to join you in 
  your nonsense?




  With pangs and cries, as thine own, O bearer of 
  many children!

This chant all wild, to a race of pride I give.)



  O lands! would you be freer than all that has ever 
  been before?


  If you would be freer than all that has been before,
  come listen to me.



Fear grace&#8212;Fear delicatesse,
Fear the mellow sweet, the sucking of honey-juice;
Beware the advancing mortal ripening of nature,

  Beware what precedes the decay of the ruggedness of 
  states and men.







5


  Ages, precedents, chants, have long been accumu-
  lating undirected materials,

America brings builders, and brings its own styles.



  The poets of Asia and Europe have done their work,
  and pass'd to other spheres,


  One work forever remains, the work of surpassing all 
  they have done.




  America, curious toward foreign characters, stands 
  by its own at all hazards,


  Stands removed, spacious, composite, sound, initiates 
  the true use of precedents,


  Does not repel them, or the past, or what they have 
  produced under their forms,


  Takes the lesson with calmness, perceives the corpse 
  slowly borne from the house,


  Perceives that it waits a little while in the door&#8212;that 
  it was fittest for its days,


  That its life has descended to the stalwart and well-
  shaped heir who approaches,

And that he shall be fittest for his days.


Any period, one nation must lead,

  One land must be the promise and reliance of the 
  future.



These States are the amplest poem,

  Here is not merely a nation, but a teeming nation of 
  nations,


  Here the doings of men correspond with the broad-
  cast doings of the day and night,


  Here is what moves in magnificent masses, careless of 
  particulars,


  Here are the roughs, beards, friendliness, combative-
  ness, the Soul loves,


  Here the flowing trains&#8212;here the crowds, equality,
  diversity, the Soul loves.







6

Land of lands, and bards to corroborate!

  Of them, standing among them, one lifts to the light 
  his west-bred face,


  To him the hereditary countenance bequeath'd, both 
  mother's and father's,

His first parts substances, earth, water, animals, trees,

  Built of the common stock, having room for far and 
  near.


  Used to dispense with other lands, incarnating this 
  land,


  Attracting it Body and Soul to himself, hanging on its 
  neck with incomparable love,


  Plunging his semitic muscle into its merits and 
  demerits,


  Making its cities, beginnings, events, diversities,
  wars, vocal in him,

Making its rivers, lakes, bays, embouchure in him,

  Mississippi with yearly freshets and changing chutes&#8212; 
  Columbia, Niagara, Hudson, spending them-
  selves lovingly in him,


  If the Atlantic coast stretch, or the Pacific coast 
  stretch, he stretching with them north or south,


  Spanning between them east and west, and touching 
  whatever is between them,


  Growths growing from him to offset the growth of 
  pine, cedar, hemlock, live-oak, locust, chestnut,
  hickory, cotton-wood, orange, magnolia,


  Tangles as tangled in him as any cane-brake or 
  swamp,


  He likening sides and peaks of mountains, forests 
  coated with northern transparent ice,


  Off him pasturage sweet and natural as savanna, up-
  land, prairie,


  Through him flights, whirls, screams, answering those 
  of the fish-hawk, mocking-bird, night-heron,
  and eagle; 


  His spirit surrounding his country's spirit, unclosed 
  to good and evil,





  Surrounding the essences of real things, old times 
  and present times,


  Surrounding just found shores, islands, tribes of red 
  aborigines,


  Weather-beaten vessels, landings, settlements, embryo 
  stature and muscle,


  The haughty defiance of the Year 1&#8212;war, peace, the 
  formation of the Constitution,


  The separate States, the simple, elastic scheme, the 
  immigrants,


  The Union, always swarming with blatherers, and 
  always sure and impregnable,


  The unsurvey'd interior, log-houses, clearings, wild 
  animals, hunters, trappers; 


  Surrounding the multiform agriculture, mines, tem-
  perature, the gestation of new States,


  Congress convening every Twelfth-month, the mem-
  bers duly coming up from the uttermost parts; 


  Surrounding the noble character of mechanics and 
  farmers, especially the young men,


  Responding their manners, speech, dress, friendships 
  &#8212;the gait they have of persons who never 
  knew how it felt to stand in the presence of 
  superiors,


  The freshness and candor of their physiognomy, the 
  copiousness and decision of their phrenology,


  The picturesque looseness of their carriage, their 
  fierceness when wrong'd,


  The fluency of their speech, their delight in music,
  their curiosity, good temper, and open-handed-
  ness&#8212;the whole composite make,


  The prevailing ardor and enterprise, the large amat-
  iveness,


  The perfect equality of the female with the male, the 
  fluid movement of the population,


  The superior marine, free commerce, fisheries, whal-
  ing, gold-digging,


  Wharf-hemm'd cities, railroad and steamboat lines,
  intersecting all points,





  Factories, mercantile life, labor-saving machinery, the 
  north-east, north-west, south-west,


  Manhattan firemen, the Yankee swap, southern plan-
  tation life,


  Slavery&#8212;the murderous, treacherous conspiracy to 
  raise it upon the ruins of all the rest; 


  On and on to the grapple with it&#8212;Assassin! then 
  your life or ours be the stake&#8212;and respite no 
  more.




7

(Lo! high toward heaven, this day,
Libertad! from the conqueress' field return'd,
I mark the new aureola around your head;
No more of soft astral, but dazzling and fierce,

  With war's flames, and the lambent lightnings 
  playing,

And your port immovable where you stand;

  With still the inextinguishable glance, and the clench'd 
  and lifted fist,


  And your foot on the neck of the menacing one, the 
  scorner, utterly crush'd beneath you; 


  The menacing, arrogant one, that strode and advanced 
  with his senseless scorn, bearing the murderous 
  knife; 


  Lo! the wide swelling one, the braggart, that would 
  yesterday do so much!


  To-day a carrion dead and damn'd, the despised of 
  all the earth!

An offal rank, to the dunghill maggots spurn'd.)



8


  Others take finish, but the Republic is ever con-
  structive, and ever keeps vista; 


  Others adorn the past&#8212;but you, O days of the pres-
  ent, I adorn you!


  O days of the future, I believe in you! I isolate my-
  self for your sake; 





  O America, because you build for mankind, I build 
  for you!


  O well-beloved stone-cutters! I lead them who plan 
  with decision and science,


  I lead the present with friendly hand toward the 
  future.




  Bravas to all semitic impulses sending strong child-
  ren to the next age!


  But damn that which spends itself on flaunters and 
  dalliers, with no thought of the stain, pains,
  dismay, feebleness, it is bequeathing.




9

I heard the voice arising, demanding bards;

  By them, all native and grand&#8212;by them only can The 
  States be fused into the compact organism of a 
  nation.




  To hold men together by paper and seal, or by com-
  pulsion, is no account,


  That only holds men together which aggregates all in 
  a living principle,, as the hold of the limbs of 
  the body, or the fibres of plants.




  Of all races and eras, These States, with veins full of 
  poetical stuff, most need poets, and are to have 
  the greatest, and use them the greatest; 


  Their Presidents shall not be their common referee 
  so much as their poets shall.



(Soul of love, and tongue of fire!

  Eye to pierce the deepest deeps, and sweep the 
  world!


  &#8212;Ah, mother! prolific and full in all besides&#8212;yet 
  how long barren, barren?)







10

Of mankind, the poet is the equable man,

  Not in him, but off from him, things are grotesque,
  eccentric, fail of their full returns,


  Nothing out of its place is good, nothing in its place 
  is bad,


  He bestows on every object or quality its fit propor-
  tion, neither more nor less,

He is the arbiter of the diverse, he is the key,
He is the equalizer of his age and land,

  He supplies what wants supplying&#8212;he checks what 
  wants checking,


  In peace, out of him speaks the spirit of peace, large,
  rich, thrifty, building populous towns, encour-
  aging agriculture, arts, commerce, lighting the 
  study of man, the Soul, health, immortality,
  government,


  In war, he is the best backer of the war&#8212;he fetches 
  artillery as good as the engineer's&#8212;he can 
  make every word he speaks draw blood; 


  The years straying toward infidelity, he withholds by 
  his steady faith,


  He is no arguer, he is judgment&#8212;(Nature accepts him 
  absolutely;)


  He judges not as the judge judges, but as the sun 
  falling round a helpless thing; 

As he sees the farthest, he has the most faith,
His thoughts are the hymns of the praise of things,
In the dispute on God and eternity he is silent,

  He sees eternity less like a play with a prologue and 
  denouement,


  He sees eternity in men and women&#8212;he does not see 
  men and women as dreams or dots.




  For the great Idea, the idea of perfect and free 
  individuals,


  For that idea, the bard walks in advance, leader of 
  leaders,





  The attitude of him cheers up slaves, and horrifies 
  foreign despots.




  Without extinction is Liberty! Without retrograde 
  is Equality!


  They live in the feelings of young men, and the best 
  women,


  Not for nothing have the indomitable heads of the 
  earth been always ready to fall for Liberty.




11

For the great Idea!

  For that we live, my brethren&#8212;that is the mission of 
  Poets.



With their poems of stern defiance, ever ready,
With songs of the rapid arming, and the march,

  And the flag of peace quick-folded, and the song,
  instead, of the flag we know,

The flag of the youths and veterans&#8212;flaunting flag,
Warlike flag of the great Idea.


(Angry cloth I saw there leaping!

  I stand again in the leaden rain, your flapping folds 
  saluting; 


  I sing you over all, flying, beckoning through the fight 
  &#8212;O the hard-contested fight!


  O the cannons ope their rosy-flashing muzzles! the 
  hurtled balls scream!


  The battle-front forms amid the smoke&#8212;the volleys 
  pour incessant from the line; 


  Hark! the ringing word, Charge!&#8212;now the tussle, and 
  the furious maddening yells; 

Now the corpses tumble curl'd upon the ground,
Cold, cold in death, for precious life of you,
Angry cloth I saw there leaping.)



12


  Are you he who would assume a place to teach here,
  or lead here, or be a poet here?

The place is august&#8212;the terms obdurate.






  Who would assume to teach here, may well prepare 
  himself, body and mind,


  He may well survey, ponder, arm, fortify, harden,
  make lithe, himself,


  He shall surely be question'd beforehand by me with 
  many and stern questions.




  Who are you, indeed, who would talk or sing to 
  America?

Have you studied out my land, its idioms and men?

  Have you learn'd the physiology, phrenology, politics,
  geography, pride, freedom, friendship, of my 
  land? its substratums and objects?


  Have you consider'd the organic compact of the first 
  day of the first year of the independence of 
  The States, sign'd by the Commissioners, ratified 
  by The States, and read by Washington at the 
  head of the army?


  Have you possess'd yourself of the Federal Constitu-
  tion?


  Do you see who have left all feudal processes and 
  poems behind them, and assumed the poems 
  and processes of Democracy?


  Are you faithful to things? Do you teach as the land 
  and sea, the bodies of men, womanhood,
  amativenesss, angers, teach?

Have you sped through fleeting customs, popularities?

  Can you hold your hand against all seductions, follies,
  whirls, fierce contentions? Are you very 
  strong? Are you really of the whole people?


  Are you not of some coterie? some school or mere 
  religion?


  Are you done with reviews and criticisms of life?
  animating now to life itself?


  Have you vivified yourself from the maternity of These 
  States?


  Have you too the old, ever-fresh, forbearance and 
  impartiality?





  Do you hold the like love for those hardening to 
  maturity; for the last-born? little and big?
  and for the errant?



What is this you bring my America?
Is it uniform with my country?

  Is it not something that has been better told or done 
  before?


  Have you not imported this, or the spirit of it, in 
  some ship?

Is it a mere tale? a rhyme? a prettiness?

  Has it not dangled long at the heels of the poets,
  politicians, literats, of enemies' lands?


  Does it not assume that what is notoriously gone is 
  still here?


  Does it answer universal needs? Will it improve 
  manners?


  Can your performance face the open fields and the 
  sea-side?


  Will it absorb into me as I absorb food, air&#8212;to appear 
  again in my strength, gait, face?


  Have real employments contributed to it? original 
  makers&#8212;not mere amanuenses?


  Does it meet modern discoveries, calibers, facts, face 
  to face?


  What does it mean to me? to American persons, pro-
  gresses, cities? Chicago, Kanada, Arkansas?
  the planter, Yankee, Georgian, native, immi-
  grant, sailors, squatters, old States, new States?


  Does it encompass all The States, and the unexcep-
  tional rights of all the men and women of the 
  earth? (the genital impulse of These States;)


  Does it see behind the apparent custodians, the 
  real custodians, standing, menacing, silent&#8212;the 
  mechanics, Manhattanese, western men, south-
  erners, significant alike in their apathy, and in 
  the promptness of their love?





   Does it see what finally befalls, and has always finally 
  befallen, each temporizer, patcher, outsider,
  partialist, alarmist, infidel, who has ever ask'd 
  anything of America?

What mocking and scornful negligence?
The track strew'd with the dust of skeletons;
By the roadside others disdainfully toss'd.



13


  Rhymes and rhymers pass away&#8212;poems distill'd 
  from other poems pass away,


  The swarms of reflectors and the polite pass, and 
  leave ashes; 


  Admirers, importers, obedient persons, make but the 
  soil of literature; 


  America justifies itself, give it time&#8212;no disguise can 
  deceive it, or conceal from it&#8212;it is impassive 
  enough,


  Only toward the likes of itself will it advance to meet 
  them,


  If its poets appear, it will in due time advance to meet 
  them&#8212;there is no fear of mistake,


  (The proof of a poet shall be sternly deferr'd, till his 
  country absorbs him as affectionately as he has 
  absorb'd it.)




  He masters whose spirit masters&#8212;he tastes sweetest 
  who results sweetest in the long run; 


  The blood of the brawn beloved of time is uncon-
  straint; 


  In the need of poems, philosophy, politics, manners,
  engineering, an appropriate native grand-opera,
  shipcraft, any craft, he or she is greatest who 
  contributes the greatest original practical ex-
  ample.




  Already a nonchalant breed, silently emerging,
  appears on the streets,





  People's lips salute only doers, lovers, satisfiers,
  positive knowers; 


  There will shortly be no more priests&#8212;I say their 
  work is done,


  Death is without emergencies here, but life is per-
  petual emergencies here,


  Are your body, days, manners, superb? after death 
  you shall be superb; 


  Justice, health, self-esteem, clear the way with irre-
  sistible power; 

How dare you place anything before a man?



14

Fall behind me, States!
A man before all&#8212;myself, typical, before all.


Give me the pay I have served for!

  Give me to sing the songs of the great Idea! take all 
  the rest; 


  I have loved the earth, sun, animals&#8212;I have despised 
  riches,


  I have given alms to every one that ask'd, stood up 
  for the stupid and crazy, devoted my income 
  and labor to others,


  I have hated tyrants, argued not concerning God,
  had patience and indulgence toward the peo-
  ple, taken off my hat to nothing known or un-
  known,


  I have gone freely with powerful uneducated persons,
  and with the young, and with the mothers of 
  families,


  I have read these leaves to myself in the open air&#8212;I 
  have tried them by trees, stars, rivers,


  I have dismiss'd whatever insulted my own Soul or 
  defiled my Body,


  I have claim'd nothing to myself which I have not 
  carefully claim'd for others on the same terms,


  I have sped to the camps, and comrades found and 
  accepted from every State,





  I am willing to wait to be understood by the growth 
  of the taste of myself,

I reject none, I permit all.



  (Say, O mother! have I not to your thought been 
  faithful?

Have I not, through life, kept that alone before me?)



15

I swear I begin to see the meaning of these things!
It is not the earth, it is not America, who is so great,

  It is I who am great, or to be great&#8212;it is you up 
  there, or any one,


  It is to walk rapidly through civilizations, govern-
  ments, theories,

Through poems, pageants, shows, to individuals.


Underneath all, individuals!

  I swear nothing is good to me now that ignores 
  individuals!

The American compact is altogether with individuals,

  The only government is that which makes minute of 
  individuals,


  The whole theory of the universe is directed to one 
  single individual&#8212;namely, to You.




  (Mother! with subtle sense&#8212;with the naked sword 
  in your hand,


  I saw you at last refuse to treat but directly with 
  individuals.)




16

Underneath all, nativity,

  I swear I will stand by my own nativity&#8212;pious or 
  impious, so be it; 

I swear I am charm'd with nothing except nativity,

  Men, women, cities, nations, are only beautiful from 
  nativity.







  Underneath all is the need of the expression of love 
  for men and women,


  I swear I have seen enough of mean and impotent 
  modes of expressing love for men and women,


  After this day I take my own modes of expressing 
  love for men and women.




  I swear I will have each quality of my race in 
  myself,


  (Talk as you like, he only suits These States whose 
  manners favor the audacity and sublime turbu-
  lence of The States.)




  Underneath the lessons of things, spirits, Nature,
  governments, ownerships, I swear I perceive 
  other lessons,


  Underneath all, to me is myself&#8212;to you, yourself,
  (the same monotonous old song.)




17


  O I see now, flashing, that this America is only you 
  and me,

Its power, weapons, testimony, are you and me,

  Its crimes, lies, thefts, defections, slavery, are you 
  and me,


  Its Congress is you and me&#8212;the officers, capitols,
  armies, ships, are you and me,

Its endless gestations of new States are you and me,

  The war&#8212;that war so bloody and grim&#8212;the war I 
  wish to forget&#8212;was you and me,

Natural and artificial are you and me,

  Freedom, language, poems, employments, are you 
  and me,

Past, present, future, are you and me.



18

I swear I dare not shirk any part of myself,
Not any part of America, good or bad,




  Not the promulgation of Liberty&#8212;not to cheer up 
  slaves and horrify foreign despots,

Not to build for that which builds for mankind,

  Not to balance ranks, complexions, creeds, and the 
  sexes,

Not to justify science, nor the march of equality,

  Nor to feed the arrogant blood of the brawn beloved 
  of time.




  I swear I am for those that have never been 
  master'd!


  For men and women whose tempers have never been 
  master'd,


  For those whom laws, theories, conventions, can never 
  master.




  I swear I am for those who walk abreast with the 
  whole earth!

Who inaugurate one, to inaugurate all.


I swear I will not be outfaced by irrational things!

  I will penetrate what it is in them that is sarcastic 
  upon me!

I will make cities and civilizations defer to me!

  This is what I have learnt from America&#8212;it is the 
  amount&#8212;and it I teach again.




  (Democracy! while weapons were everywhere aim'd 
  at your breast,


  I saw you serenely give birth to children&#8212;saw in 
  dreams your dilating form; 

Saw you with spreading mantle covering the world.)



19

I will confront these shows of the day and night!
I will know if I am to be less than they!
I will see if I am not as majestic as they!
I will see if I am not as subtle and real as they!
I will see if I am to be less generous than they!






  I will see if I have no meaning, while the houses 
  and ships have meaning!


  I will see if the fishes and birds are to be enough for 
  themselves, and I am not to be enough for 
  myself.




20


  I match my spirit against yours, you orbs, growths,
  mountains, brutes,


  Copious as you are, I absorb you all in myself, and 
  become the master myself.




  America isolated, yet embodying all, what is it 
  finally except myself?

These States&#8212;what are they except myself?



  I know now why the earth is gross, tantalizing,
  wicked&#8212;it is for my sake,


  I take you to be mine, you beautiful, terrible, rude 
  forms.



(Mother! bend down, bend close to me your face!
I know not what these plots and deferments are for;

  I know not fruition's success&#8212;but I know that through 
  war and peace your work goes on, and must 
  yet go on.)




21

&#8230;&#8230;Thus, by blue Ontario's shore,

  While the winds fann'd me, and the waves came 
  trooping toward me,


  I sang with the Power's pulsations&#8212;and the charm of 
  my theme was upon me,


  Till the tissues that held me, parted their ties upon 
  me.



And I saw the free Soul of poets;
The loftiest bards of past ages strode before me,

  Strange, large men, long unwaked, undisclosed, were 
  disclosed to me.









22

O my rapt song, my charm&#8212;mock me not!

  Not for the bards of the past&#8212;not to invoke them 
  have I launch'd you forth,


  Not to call even those lofty bards here by Ontario's 
  shores,

Have I sung, so capricious and loud, my savage song.


But, O strong soul of Poets,
Bards for my own land, ere I go, I invoke.


You Bards grand as these days so grand!

  Bards of the great Idea! Bards of the wondrous in-
  ventions!


  Bards of the marching armies&#8212;a million soldiers 
  waiting ever-ready,


  Bards towering like hills&#8212;(no more these dots, these 
  pigmies, these little piping straws, these gnats,
  that fill the hour, to pass for poets;)
          
 
  Bards with songs as from burning coals, or the light-
  ning's fork'd stripes!


  Ample Ohio's bards&#8212;bards for California! inland 
  bards; 


  Bards of pride! Bards tallying the ocean's roar, and 
  the swooping eagle's scream!

You, by my charm, I invoke!








LEAVES OF GRASS.



1


O ME, man of slack faith so long!
Standing aloof&#8212;denying portions so long;
Only aware to-day of compact, all-diffused truth;

  Discovering to-day there is no lie, or form of lie, and 
  can be none, but grows as inevitably upon it-
  self as the truth does upon itself,


  Or as any law of the earth, or any natural production 
  of the earth does.




  (This is curious, and may not be realized immedi-
  ately&#8212;But it must be realized; 


  I feel in myself that I represent falsehoods equally 
  with the rest,

And that the universe does.)



  Where has fail'd a perfect return, indifferent of lies 
  or the truth?


  Is it upon the ground, or in water or fire? or in the 
  spirit of man? or in the meat and blood?




  Meditating among liars, and retreating sternly into 
  myself, I see that there are really no liars or 
  lies after all,


  And that nothing fails its perfect return&#8212;And that 
  what are called lies are perfect returns,


  And that each thing exactly represents itself, and 
  what has preceded it,


  And that the truth includes all, and is compact, just 
  as much as space is compact,





  And that there is no flaw or vacuum in the amount of 
  the truth&#8212;but that all is truth without ex-
  ception; 


  And henceforth I will go celebrate anything I see 
  or am,

And sing and laugh, and deny nothing.





2.


FORMS, qualities, lives, humanity, language, thoughts,

  The ones known, and the ones unknown&#8212;the ones on 
  the stars,

The stars themselves, some shaped, others unshaped,

  Wonders as of those countries&#8212;the soil, trees, cities,
  inhabitants, whatever they may be,


  Splendid suns, the moons and rings, the countless 
  combinations and effects; 


  Such-like, and as good as such-like, visible here or 
  anywhere, stand provided for in a handful of 
  space, which I extend my arm and half enclose 
  with my hand; 


  That contains the start of each and all&#8212;the virtue,
  the germs of all.




3.

Now I make a leaf of Voices&#8212;for I have found 
  nothing mightier than they are,


  And I have found that no word spoken, but is beauti-
  ful, in its place.




  O what is it in me that makes me tremble so at 
  voices?


  Surely, whoever speaks to me in the right voice, him 
  or her I shall follow,





  As the water follows the moon, silently, with fluid 
  steps any where around the globe.



All waits for the right voices;

  Where is the practis'd and perfect organ? Where is 
  the develop'd Soul?


  For I see every word utter'd thence has deeper,
  sweeter, new sounds, impossible on less terms.




  I see brains and lips closed&#8212;tympans and temples 
  unstruck,


  Until that comes which has the quality to strike and 
  to unclose,


  Until that comes which has the quality to bring forth 
  what lies slumbering, forever ready, in all 
  words.





4.

              WHAT am I, after all, but a child, pleased with the 
  sound of my own name? repeating it over and 
  over; 

I stand apart to hear&#8212;it never tires me.


To you, your name also,

  Did you think there was nothing but two or three pro-
  nunciations in the sound of your name?






5


  LOCATIONS and times&#8212;what is it in me that meets them 
  all, whenever and wherever, and makes me at 
  home?


  Forms, colors, densities, odors&#8212;what is it in me that 
  corresponds with them?







THOUGHTS.



1.


OF these years I sing,

  How they pass through convuls'd pains, as through 
  parturitions; 


  How America illustrates birth, gigantic youth, the 
  promise, the sure fulfilment, despite of people 
  &#8212;Illustrates evil as well as good; 


  How many hold despairingly yet to the models de-
  parted, caste, myths, obedience, compulsion, and 
  to infidelity; 


  How few see the arrived models, the Athletes, The 
  States&#8212;or see freedom or spirituality&#8212;or hold 
  any faith in results,


  (But I see the Athletes&#8212;and I see the results glorious 
  and inevitable&#8212;and they again leading to other 
  results;)


  How the great cities appear&#8212;How the Democratic 
  masses, turbulent, wilful, as I love them,


  How the whirl, the contest, the wrestle of evil with 
  good, the sounding and resounding, keep on 
  and on; 


  How society waits unform'd, and is between things 
  ended and things begun; 


  How America is the continent of glories, and of the 
  triumph of freedom, and of the Democracies,
  and of the fruits of society, and of all that is 
  begun; 


  And how The States are complete in themselves&#8212; 
  And how all triumphs and glories are complete 
  in themselves, to lead onward,


  And how these of mine, and of The States, will in 
  their turn be convuls'd, and serve other par-
  turitions and transitions,


  And how all people, sights, combinations, the Demo-
  cratic masses, too, serve&#8212;and how every fact 
  serves,





  And how now, or at any time, each serves the exquisite 
  transition of Death.





2.


OF seeds dropping into the ground&#8212;of birth,

  Of the steady concentration of America, inland, up-
  ward, to impregnable and swarming places,


  Of what Indiana, Kentucky, Ohio and the rest, are 
  to be,


  Of what a few years will show there in Nebraska,
  Colorado, Nevada, and the rest; 


  Of what the feuillage of America is the preparation 
  for&#8212;and of what all the sights, North, South,
  East and West, are; 


  Of the temporary use of materials, for identity's 
  sake,


  Of departing&#8212;of the growth of a mightier race than 
  any yet,


  Of myself, soon, perhaps, closing up my songs by 
  these shores,


  Of California&#8212;of Oregon&#8212;and of me journeying to 
  live and sing there; 


  Of the Western Sea&#8212;of the spread inland between it 
  and the spinal river,

Of the great pastoral area, athletic and feminine,

  Of all sloping down there where the fresh free giver,
  the mother, the Mississippi flows,


  Of future men and women there&#8212;of happiness in 
  those high plateaus, ranging three thousand 
  miles, warm and cold; 


  Of cities yet unsurvey'd and unsuspected, (as I am 
  also, and as it must be;)


  Of the new and good names&#8212;of the strong develop-
  ments&#8212;of inalienable homesteads; 


  Of a free and original life there&#8212;of simple diet and 
  clean and sweet blood; 


  Of litheness, majestic faces, clear eyes, and perfect 
  physique there; 





  Of immense spiritual results, future years, each side 
  of the Anahuacs; 


  Of these leaves, well understood there, (being made 
  for that area;)

Of the native scorn of grossness and gain there;

  (O it lurks in me night and day&#8212;What is gain, after 
  all, to savageness and freedom?)





AS NEARING DEPARTURE.


AS nearing departure,
As the time draws nigh, glooming, a cloud,
A dread beyond, of I know not what, darkens me.


I shall go forth,

  I shall traverse The States&#8212;but I cannot tell whither 
  or how long; 


  Perhaps soon, some day or night while I am singing,
  my voice will suddenly cease.




  O book and chant! must all then amount to but 
  this?


  Must we barely arrive at this beginning of me?&#8230; 
  And yet it is enough, O soul!

O soul! we have positively appear'd&#8212;that is enough.







AS I WALK, SOLITARY, UNATTENDED.


AS I walk, solitary, unattended,

  Around me I hear that eclat of the world&#8212;politics,
  produce,

The announcements of recognized things&#8212;science,

  The approved growth of cities, and the spread of 
  inventions.



I see the ships, (they will last a few years,)
The vast factories, with their foremen and workmen,

  And hear the indorsement of all, and do not object 
  to it.



But we too announce solid things;

  Science, ships, politics, cities, factories, are not nothing 
  &#8212;they serve,

They stand for realities&#8212;all is as it should be.


Then my realities;
What else is so real as mine?

  Libertad, and the divine average&#8212;Freedom to every 
  slave on the face of the earth,


  The rapt promises and lumin&#233; of seers&#8212;the spiritual 
  world&#8212;these centuries-lasting songs,


  And our visions, the visions of poets, the most solid 
  announcements of any.



For we support all,
After the rest is done and gone, we remain;
There is no final reliance but upon us;

  Democracy rests finally upon us, (I, my brethren,
  begin it,)

And our visions sweep through eternity.







SONG AT SUNSET.


SPLENDOR of ended day, floating and filling me!
Hour prophetic&#8212;hour resuming the past!
Inflating my throat&#8212;you, divine average!
You, Earth and Life, till the last ray gleams, I sing.


Open mouth of my Soul, uttering gladness,
Eyes of my Soul, seeing perfection,
Natural life of me, faithfully praising things;
Corroborating forever the triumph of things.


Illustrious every one!

  Illustrious what we name space&#8212;sphere of unnum-
  ber'd spirits; 


  Illustrious the mystery of motion, in all beings, even 
  the tiniest insect; 


  Illustrious the attribute of speech&#8212;the senses&#8212;the 
  body; 


  Illustrious the passing light! Illustrious the pale 
  reflection on the new moon in the western sky!


  Illustrious whatever I see, or hear, or touch, to the 
  last.



Good in all,
In the satisfaction and aplomb of animals,
In the annual return of the seasons,
In the hilarity of youth,
In the strength and flush of manhood,
In the grandeur and exquisiteness of old age,
In the superb vistas of Death.


Wonderful to depart;
Wonderful to be here!
The heart, to jet the all-alike and innocent blood,
To breathe the air, how delicious!
To speak! to walk! to seize something by the hand!




  To prepare for sleep, for bed&#8212;to look on my rose-
  color'd flesh,

To be conscious of my body, so happy, so large,
To be this incredible God I am,

  To have gone forth among other Gods&#8212;those men 
  and women I love.



Wonderful how I celebrate you and myself!

  How my thoughts play subtly at the spectacles 
  around!

How the clouds pass silently overhead!

  How the earth darts on and on! and how the sun,
  moon, stars, dart on and on!

How the water sports and sings! (Surely it is alive!)

  How the trees rise and stand up&#8212;with strong trunks 
  &#8212;with branches and leaves!


  (Surely there is something more in each of the trees&#8212; 
  some living Soul.)



O amazement of things! even the least particle!
O spirituality of things!

  O strain musical, flowing through ages and continents 
  &#8212;now reaching me and America!


  I take your strong chords&#8212;I intersperse them, and 
  cheerfully pass them forward.




  I too carol the sun, usher'd, or at noon, or, as now,
  setting,


  I too throb to the brain and beauty of the earth, and 
  of all the growths of the earth,

I too have felt the resistless call of myself.


As I sail'd down the Mississippi,
As I wander'd over the prairies,

  As I have lived&#8212;As I have look'd through my win-
  dows, my eyes,


  As I went forth in the morning&#8212;As I beheld the light 
  breaking in the east; 





  As I bathed on the beach of the Eastern Sea, and 
  again on the beach of the Western Sea; 


  As I roam'd the streets of inland Chicago&#8212;whatever 
  streets I have roam'd; 


  Wherever I have been, I have charged myself with 
  contentment and triumph.



I sing the Equalities;
I sing the endless final&#233;s of things;
I say Nature continues&#8212;Glory continues;
I praise with electric voice;
For I do not see one imperfection in the universe;

  And I do not see one cause or result lamentable at last 
  in the universe.



O setting sun! though the time has come,
I still warble under you, unmitigated adoration.




TO A HISTORIAN.
 You who celebrate bygones!

  Who have explored the outward, the surfaces of the 
  races&#8212;the life that has exhibited itself; 


  Who have treated of man as the creature of politics,
  aggregates, rulers and priests; 


  I, habitu&#233; of the Alleghanies, treating man as he is in 
  himself, in his own rights,


  Pressing the pulse of the life that has seldom ex-
  hibited itself, (the great pride of man in him-
  self;)

Chanter of Personality, outlining what is yet to be,
I project the history of the future.






ASSURANCES.

  I NEED no assurances&#8212;I am a man who is pre-
  occupied, of his own Soul; 


  I do not doubt that from under the feet, and beside 
  the hands and face I am cognizant of, are now 
  looking faces I am not cognizant of&#8212;calm and 
  actual faces; 


  I do not doubt but the majesty and beauty of the 
  world are latent in any iota of the world; 


  I do not doubt I am limitless, and that the universes 
  are limitless&#8212;in vain I try to think how limitless; 


  I do not doubt that the orbs, and the systems of orbs,
  play their swift sports through the air on pur-
  pose&#8212;and that I shall one day be eligible to 
  do as much as they, and more than they; 


  I do not doubt that temporary affairs keep on and on,
  millions of years; 


  I do not doubt interiors have their interiors, and ex-
  teriors have their exteriors&#8212;and that the eye-
  sight has another eye-sight, and the hearing 
  another hearing, and the voice another voice; 


  I do not doubt that the passionately-wept deaths of 
  young men are provided for&#8212;and that the 
  deaths of young women, and the deaths of little 
  children, are provided for; 


  I do not doubt that wrecks at sea, no matter what the 
  horrors of them&#8212;no matter whose wife, child,
  husband, father, lover, has gone down&#8212;are 
  provided for, to the minutest points; 


  I do not doubt that shallowness, meanness, malig-
  nance, are provided for; 


  I do not doubt that cities, you, America, the remain-
  der of the earth, politics, freedom, degrada-
  tions, are carefully provided for; 


  I do not doubt that whatever can possibly happen,
  any where, at any time, is provided for, in the 
  inherences of things.







SO LONG!

1

 To conclude&#8212;I announce what comes after me,

  I announce mightier offspring, orators, days, and 
  then depart.



I remember I said, before my leaves sprang at all,

  I would raise my voice jocund and strong, with re-
  ference to consummations.



When America does what was promis'd,

  When there are plentiful athletic bards, inland and 
  seaboard,


  When through These States walk a hundred millions 
  of superb persons,


  When the rest part away for superb persons, and con-
  tribute to them,


  When breeds of the most perfect mothers denote 
  America,

Then to me my due fruition.


I have press'd through in my own right,

  I have offer'd my style to every one&#8212;I have journey'd 
  with confident step,


  While my pleasure is yet at the full, I whisper, So 
  long! 


  And take the young woman's hand, and the young 
  man's hand, for the last time.




2

I announce natural persons to arise,
I announce justice triumphant,



I announce uncompromising liberty and equality,

  I announce the justification of candor, and the justi-
  fication of pride.




  I announce that the identity of These States is a 
  single identity only,

I announce the Union more and more compact,

  I announce splendors and majesties to make all the 
  previous politics of the earth insignificant.




  I announce adhesiveness&#8212;I say it shall be limitless,
  unloosen'd,


  I say you shall yet find the friend you was looking 
  for.




  I announce a man or woman coming&#8212;perhaps you 
  are the one,(So long!)


  I announce the great individual, fluid as Nature, chaste,
  affectionate, compassionate, fully armed.




  I announce a life that shall be copious, vehement,
  spiritual, bold,


  And I announce an old age that shall lightly and joy-
  fully meet its translation.




3

O thicker and faster! (So long!)
O crowding too close upon me;
I foresee too much&#8212;it means more than I thought,
It appears to me I am dying.


Hasten throat, and sound your last!

  Salute me&#8212;salute the days once more. Peal the old 
  cry once more.






Screaming electric, the atmosphere using,
At random glancing, each as a notice absorbing,
Swiftly on, but a little while alighting,
Curious envelop'd messages delivering,
Sparkles hot, seed ethereal, down in the dirt dropping,

  Myself unknowing, my commission obeying, to ques-
  tion it never daring,

To ages, and ages yet, the growth of the seed leaving,

  To troops out of me rising&#8212;they the tasks I have set 
  promulging,


  To women certain whispers of myself bequeathing&#8212; 
  their affection me more clearly explaining,


  To young men my problems offering&#8212;no dallier I&#8212; 
  I the muscle of their brains trying,

So I pass&#8212;a little time vocal, visible, contrary,

  Afterward, a melodious echo, passionately bent for&#8212; 
  (death making me really undying,)


  The best of me then when no longer visible&#8212;for to-
  ward that I have been incessantly preparing.




  What is there more, that I lag and pause, and 
  crouch extended with unshut mouth?

Is there a single final farewell?



4

My songs cease&#8212;I abandon them,

  From behind the screen where I hid, I advance per-
  sonally, solely to you.



Camerado! This is no book,
Who touches this, touches a man,
(Is it night? Are we here alone?)
It is I you hold, and who holds you,

  I spring from the pages into your arms&#8212;decease calls 
  me 






O how your fingers drowse me!

  Your breath falls around me like dew&#8212;your pulse lulls 
  the tympans of my ears,

I feel immerged from head to foot,
Delicious&#8212;enough.


Enough, O deed impromptu and secret!

  Enough, O gliding present! Enough, O summ'd-up 
  past!




5

Dear friend, whoever you are, here, take this kiss,
I give it especially to you&#8212;Do not forget me,

  I feel like one who has done his work&#8212;I progress on,
  &#8212;(long enough have I dallied with Life,)


  The unknown sphere, more real than I dream'd, more 
  direct, darts awakening rays about me&#8212;So 
  long! 


  Remember my words&#8212;I love you&#8212;I depart from 
  materials,

I am as one disembodied, triumphant, dead.



 FINIS. 




