


O there is blessing in this gentle breeze,

A visitant that while it fans my cheek

Doth seem half-conscious of the joy it brings

From the green fields, and from yon azure sky.

Whate'er its mission, the soft breeze can come

To none more grateful than to me; escaped

From the vast city, where I long had pined

A discontented sojourner: now free,

Free as a bird to settle where I will.

What dwelling shall receive me? in what vale

Shall be my harbour? underneath what grove

Shall I take up my home? and what clear stream

Shall with its murmur lull me into rest?

The earth is all before me. With a heart

Joyous, nor scared at its own liberty,

I look about; and should the chosen guide

Be nothing better than a wandering cloud,

I cannot miss my way. I breathe again!

Trances of thought and mountings of the mind

Come fast upon me: it is shaken off,

That burthen of my own unnatural self,

The heavy weight of many a weary day

Not mine, and such as were not made for me.

Long months of peace (if such bold word accord

With any promises of human life),

Long months of ease and undisturbed delight

Are mine in prospect; whither shall I turn,

By road or pathway, or through trackless field,

Up hill or down, or shall some floating thing

Upon the river point me out my course?



﻿Dear Liberty! Yet what would it avail

But for a gift that consecrates the joy?

For I, methought, while the sweet breath of heaven

Was blowing on my body, felt within

A correspondent breeze, that gently moved

With quickening virtue, but is now become

A tempest, a redundant energy,

Vexing its own creation. Thanks to both,

And their congenial powers, that, while they join

In breaking up a long-continued frost,

Bring with them vernal promises, the hope

Of active days urged on by flying hours,—

Days of sweet leisure, taxed with patient thought

Abstruse, nor wanting punctual service high,

Matins and vespers of harmonious verse!



﻿Thus far, Friend! did I, not used to make

A present joy the matter of a song,

Pour forth that day my soul in measured strains

That would not be forgotten, and are here

Recorded: to the open fields I told

A prophecy: poetic numbers came

Spontaneously to clothe in priestly robe

A renovated spirit singled out,

Such hope was mine, for holy services.

My own voice cheered me, and, far more, the mind's

Internal echo of the imperfect sound;

To both I listened, drawing from them both

A cheerful confidence in things to come.



﻿Content and not unwilling now to give

A respite to this passion, I paced on

With brisk and eager steps; and came, at length,

To a green shady place, where down I sate

Beneath a tree, slackening my thoughts by choice,

And settling into gentler happiness.

'Twas autumn, and a clear and placid day,

With warmth, as much as needed, from a sun

Two hours declined towards the west; a day

With silver clouds, and sunshine on the grass,

And in the sheltered and the sheltering grove

A perfect stillness. Many were the thoughts

Encouraged and dismissed, till choice was made

Of a known Vale, whither my feet should turn,

Nor rest till they had reached the very door

Of the one cottage which methought I saw.

No picture of mere memory ever looked

So fair; and while upon the fancied scene

I gazed with growing love, a higher power

Than Fancy gave assurance of some work

Of glory there forthwith to be begun,

Perhaps too there performed. Thus long I mused,

Nor e'er lost sight of what I mused upon,

Save when, amid the stately grove of oaks,

Now here, now there, an acorn, from its cup

Dislodged, through sere leaves rustled, or at once

To the bare earth dropped with a startling sound.

From that soft couch I rose not, till the sun

Had almost touched the horizon; casting then

A backward glance upon the curling cloud

Of city smoke, by distance ruralised;

Keen as a Truant or a Fugitive,

But as a Pilgrim resolute, I took,

Even with the chance equipment of that hour,

The road that pointed toward the chosen Vale.

It was a splendid evening, and my soul

Once more made trial of her strength, nor lacked

Æolian visitations; but the harp

Was soon defrauded, and the banded host

Of harmony dispersed in straggling sounds,

And lastly utter silence! "Be it so;

Why think of any thing but present good?"

So, like a home-bound labourer I pursued

My way beneath the mellowing sun, that shed

Mild influence; nor left in me one wish

Again to bend the Sabbath of that time

To a servile yoke. What need of many words?

A pleasant loitering journey, through three days

Continued, brought me to my hermitage.

I spare to tell of what ensued, the life

In common things—the endless store of things,

Rare, or at least so seeming, every day

Found all about me in one neighbourhood—

The self-congratulation, and, from morn

To night, unbroken cheerfulness serene.

But speedily an earnest longing rose

To brace myself to some determined aim,

Reading or thinking; either to lay up

New stores, or rescue from decay the old

By timely interference: and therewith

Came hopes still higher, that with outward life

I might endue some airy phantasies

That had been floating loose about for years,

And to such beings temperately deal forth

The many feelings that oppressed my heart.

That hope hath been discouraged; welcome light

Dawns from the east, but dawns to disappear

And mock me with a sky that ripens not

Into a steady morning: if my mind,

Remembering the bold promise of the past,

Would gladly grapple with some noble theme,

Vain is her wish; where'er she turns she finds

Impediments from day to day renewed.



﻿And now it would content me to yield up

Those lofty hopes awhile, for present gifts

Of humbler industry. But, oh, dear Friend!

The Poet, gentle creature as he is,

Hath, like the Lover, his unruly times;

His fits when he is neither sick nor well,

Though no distress be near him but his own

Unmanageable thoughts: his mind, best pleased

While she as duteous as the mother dove

Sits brooding, lives not always to that end,

But like the innocent bird, hath goadings on

That drive her as in trouble through the groves;

With me is now such passion, to be blamed

No otherwise than as it lasts too long.



﻿When, as becomes a man who would prepare

For such an arduous work, I through myself

Make rigorous inquisition, the report

Is often cheering; for I neither seem

To lack that first great gift, the vital soul,

Nor general Truths, which are themselves a sort

Of Elements and Agents, Under-powers,

Subordinate helpers of the living mind:

Nor am I naked of external things,

Forms, images, nor numerous other aids

Of less regard, though won perhaps with toil

And needful to build up a Poet's praise.

Time, place, and manners do I seek, and these

Are found in plenteous store, but nowhere such

As may be singled out with steady choice;

No little band of yet remembered names

Whom I, in perfect confidence, might hope

To summon back from lonesome banishment,

And make them dwellers in the hearts of men

Now living, or to live in future years.

Sometimes the ambitious Power of choice, mistaking

Proud spring-tide swellings for a regular sea,

Will settle on some British theme, some old

Romantic tale by Milton left unsung;

More often turning to some gentle place

Within the groves of Chivalry, I pipe

To shepherd swains, or seated harp in hand,

Amid reposing knights by a river side

Or fountain, listen to the grave reports

Of dire enchantments faced and overcome

By the strong mind, and tales of warlike feats,

Where spear encountered spear, and sword with sword

Fought, as if conscious of the blazonry

That the shield bore, so glorious was the strife;

Whence inspiration for a song that winds

Through ever changing scenes of votive quest

Wrongs to redress, harmonious tribute paid

To patient courage and unblemished truth,

To firm devotion, zeal unquenchable,

And Christian meekness hallowing faithful loves.

Sometimes, more sternly moved, I would relate

How vanquished Mithridates northward passed,

And, hidden in the cloud of years, became

Odin, the Father of a race by whom

Perished the Roman Empire: how the friends

And followers of Sertorius, out of Spain

Flying, found shelter in the Fortunate Isles,

And left their usages, their arts and laws,

To disappear by a slow gradual death,

To dwindle and to perish one by one,

Starved in those narrow bounds: but not the soul

Of Liberty, which fifteen hundred years

Survived, and, when the European came

With skill and power that might not be withstood,

Did, like a pestilence, maintain its hold

And wasted down by glorious death that race

Of natural heroes: or I would record

How, in tyrannic times, some high-souled man,

Unnamed among the chronicles of kings,

Suffered in silence for Truth's sake: or tell,

How that one Frenchman,(1) through continued force

Of meditation on the inhuman deeds

Of those who conquered first the Indian Isles,

Went single in his ministry across

The Ocean; not to comfort the oppressed,

But, like a thirsty wind, to roam about

Withering the Oppressor: how Gustavus sought

Help at his need in Dalecarlia's mines:

How Wallace fought for Scotland; left the name

Of Wallace to be found, like a wild flower,

All over his dear Country; left the deeds

Of Wallace, like a family of Ghosts,

To people the steep rocks and river banks,

Her natural sanctuaries, with a local soul

Of independence and stern liberty.

Sometimes it suits me better to invent

A tale from my own heart, more near akin

To my own passions and habitual thoughts;

Some variegated story, in the main

Lofty, but the unsubstantial structure melts

Before the very sun that brightens it,

Mist into air dissolving! Then a wish,

My best and favourite aspiration, mounts

With yearning toward some philosophic song

Of Truth that cherishes our daily life;

With meditations passionate from deep

Recesses in man's heart, immortal verse

Thoughtfully fitted to the Orphean lyre;

But from this awful burthen I full soon

Take refuge and beguile myself with trust

That mellower years will bring a riper mind

And clearer insight. Thus my days are past

In contradiction; with no skill to part

Vague longing, haply bred by want of power,

From paramount impulse not to be withstood,

A timorous capacity from prudence,

From circumspection, infinite delay.

Humility and modest awe themselves

Betray me, serving often for a cloak

To a more subtle selfishness; that now

Locks every function up in blank reserve,

Now dupes me, trusting to an anxious eye

That with intrusive restlessness beats off

Simplicity and self-presented truth.

Ah! better far than this, to stray about

Voluptuously through fields and rural walks,

And ask no record of the hours, resigned

To vacant musing, unreproved neglect

Of all things, and deliberate holiday.

Far better never to have heard the name

Of zeal and just ambition, than to live

Baffled and plagued by a mind that every hour

Turns recreant to her task; takes heart again,

Then feels immediately some hollow thought

Hang like an interdict upon her hopes.

This is my lot; for either still I find

Some imperfection in the chosen theme,

Or see of absolute accomplishment

Much wanting, so much wanting, in myself,

That I recoil and droop, and seek repose

In listlessness from vain perplexity,

Unprofitably travelling toward the grave,

Like a false steward who hath much received

And renders nothing back.

﻿Was it for this

That one, the fairest of all rivers, loved

To blend his murmurs with my nurse's song,

And, from his alder shades and rocky falls,

And from his fords and shallows, sent a voice

That flowed along my dreams? For this, didst thou,

O Derwent! winding among grassy holms

Where I was looking on, a babe in arms,

Make ceaseless music that composed my thoughts

To more than infant softness, giving me

Amid the fretful dwellings of mankind

A foretaste, a dim earnest, of the calm

That Nature breathes among the hills and groves.

When he had left the mountains and received

On his smooth breast the shadow of those towers

That yet survive, a shattered monument

Of feudal sway, the bright blue river passed

Along the margin of our terrace walk;

A tempting playmate whom we dearly loved.

Oh, many a time have I, a five years' child,

In a small mill-race severed from his stream,

Made one long bathing of a summer's day;

Basked in the sun, and plunged and basked again

Alternate, all a summer's day, or scoured

The sandy fields, leaping through flowery groves

Of yellow ragwort; or when rock and hill,

The woods, and distant Skiddaw's lofty height,

Were bronzed with deepest radiance, stood alone

Beneath the sky, as if I had been born

On Indian plains, and from my mother's hut

Had run abroad in wantonness, to sport

A naked savage, in the thunder shower.



﻿Fair seed-time had my soul, and I grew up

Fostered alike by beauty and by fear:

Much favoured in my birth-place, and no less

In that beloved Vale to which erelong

We were transplanted—there were we let loose

For sports of wider range. Ere I had told

Ten birth-days, when among the mountain slopes

Frost, and the breath of frosty wind, had snapped

The last autumnal crocus, 'twas my joy

With store of springes o'er my shoulder hung

To range the open heights where woodcocks run

Along the smooth green turf. Through half the night,

Scudding away from snare to snare, I plied

That anxious visitation;—moon and stars

Were shining o'er my head. I was alone,

And seemed to be a trouble to the peace

That dwelt among them. Sometimes it befel

In these night wanderings, that a strong desire

O'erpowered my better reason, and the bird

Which was the captive of another's toil

Became my prey; and when the deed was done

I heard among the solitary hills

Low breathings coming after me, and sounds

Of undistinguishable motion, steps

Almost as silent as the turf they trod.



﻿Nor less when spring had warmed the cultured Vale,

Moved we as plunderers where the mother-bird

Had in high places built her lodge; though mean

Our object and inglorious, yet the end

Was not ignoble. Oh! when I have hung

Above the raven's nest, by knots of grass

And half-inch fissures in the slippery rock

But ill sustained, and almost (so it seemed)

Suspended by the blast that blew amain,

Shouldering the naked crag, oh, at that time

While on the perilous ridge I hung alone,

With what strange utterance did the loud dry wind

Blow through my ear! the sky seemed not a sky

Of earth—and with what motion moved the clouds!



﻿Dust as we are, the immortal spirit grows

Like harmony in music; there is a dark

Inscrutable workmanship that reconciles

Discordant elements, makes them cling together

In one society. How strange that all

The terrors, pains, and early miseries,

Regrets, vexations, lassitudes interfused

Within my mind, should e'er have borne a part,

And that a needful part, in making up

The calm existence that is mine when I

Am worthy of myself! Praise to the end!

Thanks to the means which Nature deigned to employ;

Whether her fearless visitings, or those

That came with soft alarm, like hurtless light

Opening the peaceful clouds; or she may use

Severer interventions, ministry

More palpable, as best might suit her aim.



﻿One summer evening (led by her) I found

A little boat tied to a willow tree

Within a rocky cave, its usual home.

Straight I unloosed her chain, and stepping in

Pushed from the shore. It was an act of stealth

And troubled pleasure, nor without the voice

Of mountain-echoes did my boat move on;

Leaving behind her still, on either side,

Small circles glittering idly in the moon,

Until they melted all into one track

Of sparkling light. But now, like one who rows,

Proud of his skill, to reach a chosen point

With an unswerving line, I fixed my view

Upon the summit of a craggy ridge,

The horizon's utmost boundary; far above

Was nothing but the stars and the grey sky.

She was an elfin pinnace; lustily

I dipped my oars into the silent lake,

And, as I rose upon the stroke, my boat

Went heaving through the water like a swan;

When, from behind that craggy steep till then

The horizon's bound, a huge peak, black and huge,

As if with voluntary power instinct

Upreared its head. I struck and struck again,

And growing still in stature the grim shape

Towered up between me and the stars, and still,

For so it seemed, with purpose of its own

And measured motion like a living thing,

Strode after me. With trembling oars I turned,

And through the silent water stole my way

Back to the covert of the willow tree;

There in her mooring-place I left my bark,—

And through the meadows homeward went, in grave

And serious mood; but after I had seen

That spectacle, for many days, my brain

Worked with a dim and undetermined sense

Of unknown modes of being; o'er my thoughts

There hung a darkness, call it solitude

Or blank desertion. No familiar shapes

Remained, no pleasant images of trees,

Of sea or sky, no colours of green fields;

But huge and mighty forms, that do not live

Like living men, moved slowly through the mind

By day, and were a trouble to my dreams.



﻿(2) Wisdom and Spirit of the universe!

Thou Soul that art the eternity of thought,

That givest to forms and images a breath

And everlasting motion, not in vain

By day or star-light thus from my first dawn

Of childhood didst thou intertwine for me

The passions that build up our human soul;

Not with the mean and vulgar works of man,

But with high objects, with enduring things—

With life and nature, purifying thus

The elements of feeling and of thought,

And sanctifying, by such discipline,

Both pain and fear, until we recognise

A grandeur in the beatings of the heart.

Nor was this fellowship vouchsafed to me

With stinted kindness. In November days,

When vapours rolling down the valley made

A lonely scene more lonesome, among woods,

At noon and 'mid the calm of summer nights,

When, by the margin of the trembling lake,

Beneath the gloomy hills homeward I went

In solitude, such intercourse was mine;

Mine was it in the fields both day and night,

And by the waters, all the summer long.



﻿And in the frosty season, when the sun

Was set, and visible for many a mile

The cottage windows blazed through twilight gloom,

I heeded not their summons: happy time

It was indeed for all of us—for me

It was a time of rapture! Clear and loud

The village clock tolled six,—I wheeled about,

Proud and exulting like an untired horse

That cares not for his home. All shod with steel,

We hissed along the polished ice in games

Confederate, imitative of the chase

And woodland pleasures,—the resounding horn,

The pack loud chiming, and the hunted hare.

So through the darkness and the cold we flew.

And not a voice was idle; with the din

Smitten, the precipices rang aloud;

The leafless trees and every icy crag

Tinkled like iron; while far distant hills

Into the tumult sent an alien sound

Of melancholy not unnoticed, while the stars

Eastward were sparkling clear, and in the west

The orange sky of evening died away.

Not seldom from the uproar I retired

Into a silent bay, or sportively

Glanced sideway, leaving the tumultuous throng,

To cut across the reflex of a star

That fled, and, flying still before me, gleamed

Upon the glassy plain; and oftentimes,

When we had given our bodies to the wind,

And all the shadowy banks on either side

Came sweeping through the darkness, spinning still

The rapid line of motion, then at once

Have I, reclining back upon my heels,

Stopped short; yet still the solitary cliffs

Wheeled by me—even as if the earth had rolled

With visible motion her diurnal round!

Behind me did they stretch in solemn train,

Feebler and feebler, and I stood and watched

Till all was tranquil as a dreamless sleep.



﻿Ye Presences of Nature in the sky

And on the earth! Ye Visions of the hills!

And Souls of lonely places! can I think

A vulgar hope was yours when ye employed

Such ministry, when ye through many a year

Haunting me thus among my boyish sports,

On caves and trees, upon the woods and hills,

Impressed upon all forms the characters

Of danger or desire; and thus did make

The surface of the universal earth

With triumph and delight, with hope and fear,

Work like a sea?

﻿Not uselessly employed,

Might I pursue this theme through every change

Of exercise and play, to which the year

Did summon us in his delightful round.



﻿We were a noisy crew; the sun in heaven

Beheld not vales more beautiful than ours;

Nor saw a band in happiness and joy

Richer, or worthier of the ground they trod.

I could record with no reluctant voice

The woods of autumn, and their hazel bowers

With milk-white clusters hung; the rod and line,

True symbol of hope's foolishness, whose strong

And unreproved enchantment led us on

By rocks and pools shut out from every star,

All the green summer, to forlorn cascades

Among the windings hid of mountain brooks.

—Unfading recollections! at this hour

The heart is almost mine with which I felt,

From some hill-top on sunny afternoons,

The paper kite high among fleecy clouds

Pull at her rein like an impetuous courser;

Or, from the meadows sent on gusty days,

Beheld her breast the wind, then suddenly

Dashed headlong, and rejected by the storm.



﻿Ye lowly cottages wherein we dwelt,

A ministration of your own was yours;

Can I forget you, being as you were

So beautiful among the pleasant fields

In which ye stood? or can I here forget

The plain and seemly countenance with which

Ye dealt out your plain comforts? Yet had ye

Delights and exultations of your own.

Eager and never weary we pursued

Our home-amusements by the warm peat-fire

At evening, when with pencil, and smooth slate

In square divisions parcelled out and all

With crosses and with cyphers scribbled o'er,

We schemed and puzzled, head opposed to head

In strife too humble to be named in verse:

Or round the naked table, snow-white deal,

Cherry or maple, sate in close array,

And to the combat, Loo or Whist, led on

A thick-ribbed army; not, as in the world,

Neglected and ungratefully thrown by

Even for the very service they had wrought,

But husbanded through many a long campaign.

Uncouth assemblage was it, where no few

Had changed their functions; some, plebeian cards

Which Fate, beyond the promise of their birth,

Had dignified, and called to represent

The persons of departed potentates.

Oh, with what echoes on the board they fell!

Ironic diamonds,—clubs, hearts, diamonds, spades,

A congregation piteously akin!

Cheap matter offered they to boyish wit,

Those sooty knaves, precipitated down

With scoffs and taunts, like Vulcan out of heaven:

The paramount ace, a moon in her eclipse,

Queens gleaming through their splendour's last decay,

And monarchs surly at the wrongs sustained

By royal visages. Meanwhile abroad

Incessant rain was falling, or the frost

Raged bitterly, with keen and silent tooth;

And, interrupting oft that eager game,

From under Esthwaite's splitting fields of ice

The pent-up air, struggling to free itself,

Gave out to meadow grounds and hills a loud

Protracted yelling, like the noise of wolves

Howling in troops along the Bothnic Main.



﻿Nor, sedulous as I have been to trace

How Nature by extrinsic passion first

Peopled the mind with forms sublime or fair,

And made me love them, may I here omit

How other pleasures have been mine, and joys

Of subtler origin; how I have felt,

Not seldom even in that tempestuous time,

Those hallowed and pure motions of the sense

Which seem, in their simplicity, to own

An intellectual charm; that calm delight

Which, if I err not, surely must belong

To those first-born affinities that fit

Our new existence to existing things,

And, in our dawn of being, constitute

The bond of union between life and joy.



﻿Yes, I remember when the changeful earth,

And twice five summers on my mind had stamped

The faces of the moving year, even then

I held unconscious intercourse with beauty

Old as creation, drinking in a pure

Organic pleasure from the silver wreaths

Of curling mist, or from the level plain

Of waters coloured by impending clouds.



﻿The sands of Westmoreland, the creeks and bays

Of Cumbria's rocky limits, they can tell

How, when the Sea threw off his evening shade,

And to the shepherd's hut on distant hills

Sent welcome notice of the rising moon,

How I have stood, to fancies such as these

A stranger, linking with the spectacle

No conscious memory of a kindred sight,

And bringing with me no peculiar sense

Of quietness or peace; yet have I stood,

Even while mine eye hath moved o'er many a league

Of shining water, gathering as it seemed

Through every hair-breadth in that field of light

New pleasure like a bee among the flowers.



﻿Thus oft amid those fits of vulgar joy

Which, through all seasons, on a child's pursuits

Are prompt attendants, 'mid that giddy bliss

Which, like a tempest, works along the blood

And is forgotten; even then I felt

Gleams like the flashing of a shield;—the earth

And common face of Nature spake to me

Rememberable things; sometimes, 'tis true,

By chance collisions and quaint accidents

(Like those ill-sorted unions, work supposed

Of evil-minded fairies), yet not vain

Nor profitless, if haply they impressed

Collateral objects and appearances,

Albeit lifeless then, and doomed to sleep

Until maturer seasons called them forth

To impregnate and to elevate the mind.

—And if the vulgar joy by its own weight

Wearied itself out of the memory,

The scenes which were a witness of that joy

Remained in their substantial lineaments

Depicted on the brain, and to the eye

Were visible, a daily sight; and thus

By the impressive discipline of fear,

By pleasure and repeated happiness,

So frequently repeated, and by force

Of obscure feelings representative

Of things forgotten, these same scenes so bright,

So beautiful, so majestic in themselves,

Though yet the day was distant, did become

Habitually dear, and all their forms

And changeful colours by invisible links

Were fastened to the affections.

﻿I began

My story early—not misled, I trust,

By an infirmity of love for days

Disowned by memory—ere the breath of spring

Planting my snowdrops among winter snows:

Nor will it seem to thee, O Friend! so prompt

In sympathy, that I have lengthened out

With fond and feeble tongue a tedious tale.

Meanwhile, my hope has been, that I might fetch

Invigorating thoughts from former years;

Might fix the wavering balance of my mind,

And haply meet reproaches too, whose power

May spur me on, in manhood now mature,

To honourable toil. Yet should these hopes

Prove vain, and thus should neither I be taught

To understand myself, nor thou to know

With better knowledge how the heart was framed

Of him thou lovest; need I dread from thee

Harsh judgments, if the song be loth to quit

Those recollected hours that have the charm

Of visionary things, those lovely forms

And sweet sensations that throw back our life,

And almost make remotest infancy

A visible scene, on which the sun is shining?



﻿One end at least hath been attained; my mind

Hath been revived, and if this genial mood

Desert me not, forthwith shall be brought down

Through later years the story of my life.

The road lies plain before me;—'tis a theme

Single and of determined bounds; and hence

I choose it rather at this time, than work

Of ampler or more varied argument,

Where I might be discomfited and lost:

And certain hopes are with me, that to thee

This labour will be welcome, honoured Friend!





BOOK SECOND.





SCHOOL-TIME.—(Continued.)



Thus far, Friend! have we, though leaving much

Unvisited, endeavoured to retrace

The simple ways in which my childhood walked;

Those chiefly that first led me to the love

Of rivers, woods, and fields. The passion yet

Was in its birth, sustained as might befal

By nourishment that came unsought; for still

From week to week, from month to month, we lived

A round of tumult. Duly were our games

Prolonged in summer till the day-light failed:

No chair remained before the doors; the bench

And threshold steps were empty; fast asleep

The labourer, and the old man who had sate

A later lingerer; yet the revelry

Continued and the loud uproar: at last,

When all the ground was dark, and twinkling stars

Edged the black clouds, home and to bed we went,

Feverish with weary joints and beating minds.

Ah! is there one who ever has been young,

Nor needs a warning voice to tame the pride

Of intellect and virtue's self-esteem?

One is there, though the wisest and the best

Of all mankind, who covets not at times

Union that cannot be;—who would not give,

If so he might, to duty and to truth

The eagerness of infantine desire?

A tranquillising spirit presses now

On my corporeal frame, so wide appears

The vacancy between me and those days

Which yet have such self-presence in my mind,

That, musing on them, often do I seem

Two consciousnesses, conscious of myself

And of some other Being. A rude mass

Of native rock, left midway in the square

Of our small market village, was the goal

Or centre of these sports; and when, returned

After long absence, thither I repaired,

Gone was the old grey stone, and in its place

A smart Assembly-room usurped the ground

That had been ours. There let the fiddle scream,

And be ye happy! Yet, my Friends! I know

That more than one of you will think with me

Of those soft starry nights, and that old Dame

From whom the stone was named, who there had sate,

And watched her table with its huckster's wares

Assiduous, through the length of sixty years.



﻿We ran a boisterous course; the year span round

With giddy motion. But the time approached

That brought with it a regular desire

For calmer pleasures, when the winning forms

Of Nature were collaterally attached

To every scheme of holiday delight

And every boyish sport, less grateful else

And languidly pursued.

﻿When summer came,

Our pastime was, on bright half-holidays,

To sweep along the plain of Windermere

With rival oars; and the selected bourne

Was now an Island musical with birds

That sang and ceased not; now a Sister Isle

Beneath the oaks' umbrageous covert, sown

With lilies of the valley like a field;

And now a third small Island, where survived

In solitude the ruins of a shrine

Once to Our Lady dedicate, and served

Daily with chaunted rites. In such a race

So ended, disappointment could be none,

Uneasiness, or pain, or jealousy:

We rested in the shade, all pleased alike,

Conquered and conqueror. Thus the pride of strength,

And the vain-glory of superior skill,

Were tempered; thus was gradually produced

A quiet independence of the heart;

And to my Friend who knows me I may add,

Fearless of blame, that hence for future days

Ensued a diffidence and modesty,

And I was taught to feel, perhaps too much,

The self-sufficing power of Solitude.



﻿Our daily meals were frugal, Sabine fare!

More than we wished we knew the blessing then

Of vigorous hunger—hence corporeal strength

Unsapped by delicate viands; for, exclude

A little weekly stipend, and we lived

Through three divisions of the quartered year

In penniless poverty. But now to school

From the half-yearly holidays returned,

We came with weightier purses, that sufficed

To furnish treats more costly than the Dame

Of the old grey stone, from her scant board, supplied.

Hence rustic dinners on the cool green ground,

Or in the woods, or by a river side

Or shady fountains, while among the leaves

Soft airs were stirring, and the mid-day sun

Unfelt shone brightly round us in our joy.

Nor is my aim neglected if I tell

How sometimes, in the length of those half-years,

We from our funds drew largely;—proud to curb,

And eager to spur on, the galloping steed;

And with the courteous inn-keeper, whose stud

Supplied our want, we haply might employ

Sly subterfuge, if the adventure's bound

Were distant: some famed temple where of yore

The Druids worshipped, or the antique walls

Of that large abbey, where within the Vale

Of Nightshade, to St. Mary's honour built,

Stands yet a mouldering pile with fractured arch,

Belfry, and images, and living trees,

A holy scene! Along the smooth green turf

Our horses grazed. To more than inland peace

Left by the west wind sweeping overhead

From a tumultuous ocean, trees and towers

In that sequestered valley may be seen,

Both silent and both motionless alike;

Such the deep shelter that is there, and such

The safeguard for repose and quietness.



﻿Our steeds remounted and the summons given,

With whip and spur we through the chauntry flew

In uncouth race, and left the cross-legged knight,

And the stone-abbot, and that single wren

Which one day sang so sweetly in the nave

Of the old church, that—though from recent showers

The earth was comfortless, and touched by faint

Internal breezes, sobbings of the place

And respirations, from the roofless walls

The shuddering ivy dripped large drops—yet still

So sweetly 'mid the gloom the invisible bird

Sang to herself, that there I could have made

My dwelling-place, and lived for ever there

To hear such music. Through the walls we flew

And down the valley, and, a circuit made

In wantonness of heart, through rough and smooth

We scampered homewards. Oh, ye rocks and streams,

And that still spirit shed from evening air!

Even in this joyous time I sometimes felt

Your presence, when with slackened step we breathed

Along the sides of the steep hills, or when

Lighted by gleams of moonlight from the sea

We beat with thundering hoofs the level sand.



﻿Midway on long Winander's eastern shore,

Within the crescent of a pleasant bay,

A tavern stood; no homely-featured house,

Primeval like its neighbouring cottages,

But 'twas a splendid place, the door beset

With chaises, grooms, and liveries, and within

Decanters, glasses, and the blood-red wine.

In ancient times, and ere the Hall was built

On the large island, had this dwelling been

More worthy of a poet's love, a hut,

Proud of its own bright fire and sycamore shade.

But—though the rhymes were gone that once inscribed

The threshold, and large golden characters,

Spread o'er the spangled sign-board, had dislodged

The old Lion and usurped his place, in slight

And mockery of the rustic painter's hand—

Yet, to this hour, the spot to me is dear

With all its foolish pomp. The garden lay

Upon a slope surmounted by a plain

Of a small bowling-green; beneath us stood

A grove, with gleams of water through the trees

And over the tree-tops; nor did we want

Refreshment, strawberries and mellow cream.

There, while through half an afternoon we played

On the smooth platform, whether skill prevailed

Or happy blunder triumphed, bursts of glee

Made all the mountains ring. But, ere night-fall,

When in our pinnace we returned at leisure

Over the shadowy lake, and to the beach

Of some small island steered our course with one,

The Minstrel of the Troop, and left him there,

And rowed off gently, while he blew his flute

Alone upon the rock—oh, then, the calm

And dead still water lay upon my mind

Even with a weight of pleasure, and the sky,

Never before so beautiful, sank down

Into my heart, and held me like a dream!

Thus were my sympathies enlarged, and thus

Daily the common range of visible things

Grew dear to me: already I began

To love the sun; a boy I loved the sun,

Not as I since have loved him, as a pledge

And surety of our earthly life, a light

Which we behold and feel we are alive;

Nor for his bounty to so many worlds—

But for this cause, that I had seen him lay

His beauty on the morning hills, had seen

The western mountain touch his setting orb,

In many a thoughtless hour, when, from excess

Of happiness, my blood appeared to flow

For its own pleasure, and I breathed with joy.

And, from like feelings, humble though intense,

To patriotic and domestic love

Analogous, the moon to me was dear;

For I could dream away my purposes,

Standing to gaze upon her while she hung

Midway between the hills, as if she knew

No other region, but belonged to thee,

Yea, appertained by a peculiar right

To thee and thy grey huts, thou one dear Vale!



﻿Those incidental charms which first attached

My heart to rural objects, day by day

Grew weaker, and I hasten on to tell

How Nature, intervenient till this time

And secondary, now at length was sought

For her own sake. But who shall parcel out

His intellect by geometric rules,

Split like a province into round and square?

Who knows the individual hour in which

His habits were first sown, even as a seed?

Who that shall point as with a wand and say

"This portion of the river of my mind

Came from yon fountain?" Thou, my Friend! art one

More deeply read in thy own thoughts; to thee

Science appears but what in truth she is,

Not as our glory and our absolute boast,

But as a succedaneum, and a prop

To our infirmity. No officious slave

Art thou of that false secondary power

By which we multiply distinctions, then

Deem that our puny boundaries are things

That we perceive, and not that we have made.

To thee, unblinded by these formal arts,

The unity of all hath been revealed,

And thou wilt doubt, with me less aptly skilled

Than many are to range the faculties

In scale and order, class the cabinet

Of their sensations, and in voluble phrase

Run through the history and birth of each

As of a single independent thing.

Hard task, vain hope, to analyse the mind,

If each most obvious and particular thought,

Not in a mystical and idle sense,

But in the words of Reason deeply weighed,

Hath no beginning.

﻿Blest the infant Babe,

(For with my best conjecture I would trace

Our Being's earthly progress,) blest the Babe,

Nursed in his Mother's arms, who sinks to sleep

Rocked on his Mother's breast; who with his soul

Drinks in the feelings of his Mother's eye!

For him, in one dear Presence, there exists

A virtue which irradiates and exalts

Objects through widest intercourse of sense.

No outcast he, bewildered and depressed:

Along his infant veins are interfused

The gravitation and the filial bond

Of nature that connect him with the world.

Is there a flower, to which he points with hand

Too weak to gather it, already love

Drawn from love's purest earthly fount for him

Hath beautified that flower; already shades

Of pity cast from inward tenderness

Do fall around him upon aught that bears

Unsightly marks of violence or harm.

Emphatically such a Being lives,

Frail creature as he is, helpless as frail,

An inmate of this active universe.

For feeling has to him imparted power

That through the growing faculties of sense

Doth like an agent of the one great Mind

Create, creator and receiver both,

Working but in alliance with the works

Which it beholds.—Such, verily, is the first

Poetic spirit of our human life,

By uniform control of after years,

In most, abated or suppressed; in some,

Through every change of growth and of decay,

Pre-eminent till death.

﻿From early days,

Beginning not long after that first time

In which, a Babe, by intercourse of touch

I held mute dialogues with my Mother's heart,

I have endeavoured to display the means

Whereby this infant sensibility,

Great birthright of our being, was in me

Augmented and sustained. Yet is a path

More difficult before me; and I fear

That in its broken windings we shall need

The chamois' sinews, and the eagle's wing:

For now a trouble came into my mind

From unknown causes. I was left alone

Seeking the visible world, nor knowing why.

The props of my affections were removed,

And yet the building stood, as if sustained

By its own spirit! All that I beheld

Was dear, and hence to finer influxes

The mind lay open to a more exact

And close communion. Many are our joys

In youth, but oh! what happiness to live

When every hour brings palpable access

Of knowledge, when all knowledge is delight,

And sorrow is not there! The seasons came,

And every season wheresoe'er I moved

Unfolded transitory qualities,

Which, but for this most watchful power of love,

Had been neglected; left a register

Of permanent relations, else unknown.

Hence life, and change, and beauty, solitude

More active even than "best society"—

Society made sweet as solitude

By silent inobtrusive sympathies,

And gentle agitations of the mind

From manifold distinctions, difference

Perceived in things, where, to the unwatchful eye,

No difference is, and hence, from the same source,

Sublimer joy; for I would walk alone,

Under the quiet stars, and at that time

Have felt whate'er there is of power in sound

To breathe an elevated mood, by form

Or image unprofaned; and I would stand,

If the night blackened with a coming storm,

Beneath some rock, listening to notes that are

The ghostly language of the ancient earth,

Or make their dim abode in distant winds.

Thence did I drink the visionary power;

And deem not profitless those fleeting moods

Of shadowy exultation: not for this,

That they are kindred to our purer mind

And intellectual life; but that the soul,

Remembering how she felt, but what she felt

Remembering not, retains an obscure sense

Of possible sublimity, whereto

With growing faculties she doth aspire,

With faculties still growing, feeling still

That whatsoever point they gain, they yet

Have something to pursue.

﻿And not alone,

'Mid gloom and tumult, but no less 'mid fair

And tranquil scenes, that universal power

And fitness in the latent qualities

And essences of things, by which the mind

Is moved with feelings of delight, to me

Came, strengthened with a superadded soul,

A virtue not its own. My morning walks

Were early;—oft before the hours of school

I travelled round our little lake, five miles

Of pleasant wandering. Happy time! more dear

For this, that one was by my side, a Friend,(3)

Then passionately loved; with heart how full

Would he peruse these lines! For many years

Have since flowed in between us, and, our minds

Both silent to each other, at this time

We live as if those hours had never been.

Nor seldom did I lift our cottage latch

Far earlier, ere one smoke-wreath had risen

From human dwelling, or the vernal thrush

Was audible; and sate among the woods

Alone upon some jutting eminence,

At the first gleam of dawn-light, when the Vale,

Yet slumbering, lay in utter solitude.

How shall I seek the origin? where find

Faith in the marvellous things which then I felt?

Oft in these moments such a holy calm

Would overspread my soul, that bodily eyes

Were utterly forgotten, and what I saw

Appeared like something in myself, a dream,

A prospect in the mind.

﻿'Twere long to tell

What spring and autumn, what the winter snows,

And what the summer shade, what day and night,

Evening and morning, sleep and waking, thought

From sources inexhaustible, poured forth

To feed the spirit of religious love

In which I walked with Nature. But let this

Be not forgotten, that I still retained

My first creative sensibility;

That by the regular action of the world

My soul was unsubdued. A plastic power

Abode with me; a forming hand, at times

Rebellious, acting in a devious mood;

A local spirit of his own, at war

With general tendency, but, for the most,

Subservient strictly to external things

With which it communed. An auxiliar light

Came from my mind, which on the setting sun

Bestowed new splendour; the melodious birds,

The fluttering breezes, fountains that run on

Murmuring so sweetly in themselves, obeyed

A like dominion, and the midnight storm

Grew darker in the presence of my eye:

Hence my obeisance, my devotion hence,

And hence my transport.

﻿Nor should this, perchance,

Pass unrecorded, that I still had loved

The exercise and produce of a toil,

Than analytic industry to me

More pleasing, and whose character I deem

Is more poetic as resembling more

Creative agency. The song would speak

Of that interminable building reared

By observation of affinities

In objects where no brotherhood exists

To passive minds. My seventeenth year was come;

And, whether from this habit rooted now

So deeply in my mind, or from excess

In the great social principle of life

Coercing all things into sympathy,

To unorganic natures were transferred

My own enjoyments; or the power of truth

Coming in revelation, did converse

With things that really are; I, at this time,

Saw blessings spread around me like a sea.

Thus while the days flew by, and years passed on,

From Nature and her overflowing soul,

I had received so much, that all my thoughts

Were steeped in feeling; I was only then

Contented, when with bliss ineffable

I felt the sentiment of Being spread

O'er all that moves and all that seemeth still;

O'er all that, lost beyond the reach of thought

And human knowledge, to the human eye

Invisible, yet liveth to the heart;

O'er all that leaps and runs, and shouts and sings,

Or beats the gladsome air; o'er all that glides

Beneath the wave, yea, in the wave itself,

And mighty depth of waters. Wonder not

If high the transport, great the joy I felt,

Communing in this sort through earth and heaven

With every form of creature, as it looked

Towards the Uncreated with a countenance

Of adoration, with an eye of love.

One song they sang, and it was audible,

Most audible, then, when the fleshly ear,

O'ercome by humblest prelude of that strain,

Forgot her functions, and slept undisturbed.



﻿If this be error, and another faith

Find easier access to the pious mind,

Yet were I grossly destitute of all

Those human sentiments that make this earth

So dear, if I should fail with grateful voice

To speak of you, ye mountains, and ye lakes

And sounding cataracts, ye mists and winds

That dwell among the hills where I was born.

If in my youth I have been pure in heart,

If, mingling with the world, I am content

With my own modest pleasures, and have lived

With God and Nature communing, removed

From little enmities and low desires,

The gift is yours; if in these times of fear,

This melancholy waste of hopes overthrown,

If, 'mid indifference and apathy,

And wicked exultation when good men

On every side fall off, we know not how,

To selfishness, disguised in gentle names

Of peace and quiet and domestic love,

Yet mingled not unwillingly with sneers

On visionary minds; if, in this time

Of dereliction and dismay, I yet

Despair not of our nature, but retain

A more than Roman confidence, a faith

That fails not, in all sorrow my support,

The blessing of my life; the gift is yours,

Ye winds and sounding cataracts! 'tis yours,

Ye mountains! thine, O Nature! Thou hast fed

My lofty speculations; and in thee,

For this uneasy heart of ours, I find

A never-failing principle of joy

And purest passion.

﻿Thou, my Friend! wert reared

In the great city, 'mid far other scenes;

But we, by different roads, at length have gained

The self-same bourne. And for this cause to thee

I speak, unapprehensive of contempt,

The insinuated scoff of coward tongues,

And all that silent language which so oft

In conversation between man and man

Blots from the human countenance all trace

Of beauty and of love. For thou hast sought

The truth in solitude, and, since the days

That gave thee liberty, full long desired

To serve in Nature's temple, thou hast been

The most assiduous of her ministers;

In many things my brother, chiefly here

In this our deep devotion.

﻿Fare thee well!

Health and the quiet of a healthful mind

Attend thee! seeking oft the haunts of men,

And yet more often living with thyself,

And for thyself, so haply shall thy days

Be many, and a blessing to mankind.





BOOK THIRD.





RESIDENCE AT CAMBRIDGE.



It was a dreary morning when the wheels

Rolled over a wide plain o'erhung with clouds,

And nothing cheered our way till first we saw

The long-roofed chapel of King's College lift

Turrets and pinnacles in answering files,

Extended high above a dusky grove.



﻿Advancing, we espied upon the road

A student clothed in gown and tasselled cap,

Striding along as if o'ertasked by Time,

Or covetous of exercise and air;

He passed—nor was I master of my eyes

Till he was left an arrow's flight behind.

As near and nearer to the spot we drew,

It seemed to suck us in with an eddy's force.

Onward we drove beneath the Castle; caught,

While crossing Magdalene Bridge, a glimpse of Cam;

And at the Hoop alighted, famous Inn.



﻿My spirit was up, my thoughts were full of hope;

Some friends I had, acquaintances who there

Seemed friends, poor simple school-boys, now hung round

With honour and importance: in a world

Of welcome faces up and down I roved;

Questions, directions, warnings and advice,

Flowed in upon me, from all sides; fresh day

Of pride and pleasure! to myself I seemed

A man of business and expense, and went

From shop to shop about my own affairs,

To Tutor or to Tailor, as befel,

From street to street with loose and careless mind.



﻿I was the Dreamer, they the Dream; I roamed

Delighted through the motley spectacle;

Gowns grave, or gaudy, doctors, students, streets,

Courts, cloisters, flocks of churches, gateways, towers:

Migration strange for a stripling of the hills,

A northern villager.

﻿As if the change

Had waited on some Fairy's wand, at once

Behold me rich in monies, and attired

In splendid garb, with hose of silk, and hair

Powdered like rimy trees, when frost is keen.

My lordly dressing-gown, I pass it by,

With other signs of manhood that supplied

The lack of beard.—The weeks went roundly on,

With invitations, suppers, wine and fruit,

Smooth housekeeping within, and all without

Liberal, and suiting gentleman's array.



﻿The Evangelist St. John my patron was:

Three Gothic courts are his, and in the first

Was my abiding-place, a nook obscure;

Right underneath, the College kitchens made

A humming sound, less tuneable than bees,

But hardly less industrious; with shrill notes

Of sharp command and scolding intermixed.

Near me hung Trinity's loquacious clock,

Who never let the quarters, night or day,

Slip by him unproclaimed, and told the hours

Twice over with a male and female voice.

Her pealing organ was my neighbour too;

And from my pillow, looking forth by light

Of moon or favouring stars, I could behold

The antechapel where the statue stood

Of Newton with his prism and silent face,

The marble index of a mind for ever

Voyaging through strange seas of Thought, alone.



﻿Of College labours, of the Lecturer's room

All studded round, as thick as chairs could stand,

With loyal students faithful to their books,

Half-and-half idlers, hardy recusants,

And honest dunces—of important days,

Examinations, when the man was weighed

As in a balance! of excessive hopes,

Tremblings withal and commendable fears,

Small jealousies, and triumphs good or bad,

Let others that know more speak as they know.

Such glory was but little sought by me,

And little won. Yet from the first crude days

Of settling time in this untried abode,

I was disturbed at times by prudent thoughts,

Wishing to hope without a hope, some fears

About my future worldly maintenance,

And, more than all, a strangeness in the mind,

A feeling that I was not for that hour,

Nor for that place. But wherefore be cast down?

For (not to speak of Reason and her pure

Reflective acts to fix the moral law

Deep in the conscience, nor of Christian Hope,

Bowing her head before her sister Faith

As one far mightier), hither I had come,

Bear witness Truth, endowed with holy powers

And faculties, whether to work or feel.

Oft when the dazzling show no longer new

Had ceased to dazzle, ofttimes did I quit

My comrades, leave the crowd, buildings and groves,

And as I paced alone the level fields

Far from those lovely sights and sounds sublime

With which I had been conversant, the mind

Drooped not; but there into herself returning,

With prompt rebound seemed fresh as heretofore.

At least I more distinctly recognised

Her native instincts: let me dare to speak

A higher language, say that now I felt

What independent solaces were mine,

To mitigate the injurious sway of place

Or circumstance, how far soever changed

In youth, or to be changed in manhood's prime;

Or for the few who shall be called to look

On the long shadows in our evening years,

Ordained precursors to the night of death.

As if awakened, summoned, roused, constrained,

I looked for universal things; perused

The common countenance of earth and sky:

Earth, nowhere unembellished by some trace

Of that first Paradise whence man was driven;

And sky, whose beauty and bounty are expressed

By the proud name she bears—the name of Heaven.

I called on both to teach me what they might;

Or turning the mind in upon herself

Pored, watched, expected, listened, spread my thoughts

And spread them with a wider creeping; felt

Incumbencies more awful, visitings

Of the Upholder of the tranquil soul,

That tolerates the indignities of Time,

And, from the centre of Eternity

All finite motions overruling, lives

In glory immutable. But peace! enough

Here to record that I was mounting now

To such community with highest truth—

A track pursuing, not untrod before,

From strict analogies by thought supplied

Or consciousnesses not to be subdued.

To every natural form, rock, fruit or flower,

Even the loose stones that cover the high-way,

I gave a moral life: I saw them feel,

Or linked them to some feeling: the great mass

Lay bedded in a quickening soul, and all

That I beheld respired with inward meaning.

Add that whatever of Terror or of Love

Or Beauty, Nature's daily face put on

From transitory passion, unto this

I was as sensitive as waters are

To the sky's influence in a kindred mood

Of passion; was obedient as a lute

That waits upon the touches of the wind.

Unknown, unthought of, yet I was most rich—

I had a world about me—'twas my own;

I made it, for it only lived to me,

And to the God who sees into the heart.

Such sympathies, though rarely, were betrayed

By outward gestures and by visible looks:

Some called it madness—so indeed it was,

If child-like fruitfulness in passing joy,

If steady moods of thoughtfulness matured

To inspiration, sort with such a name;

If prophecy be madness; if things viewed

By poets in old time, and higher up

By the first men, earth's first inhabitants,

May in these tutored days no more be seen

With undisordered sight. But leaving this,

It was no madness, for the bodily eye

Amid my strongest workings evermore

Was searching out the lines of difference

As they lie hid in all external forms,

Near or remote, minute or vast, an eye

Which from a tree, a stone, a withered leaf,

To the broad ocean and the azure heavens

Spangled with kindred multitudes of stars,

Could find no surface where its power might sleep;

Which spake perpetual logic to my soul,

And by an unrelenting agency

Did bind my feelings even as in a chain.



﻿And here, Friend! have I retraced my life

Up to an eminence, and told a tale

Of matters which not falsely may be called

The glory of my youth. Of genius, power,

Creation and divinity itself

I have been speaking, for my theme has been

What passed within me. Not of outward things

Done visibly for other minds, words, signs,

Symbols or actions, but of my own heart

Have I been speaking, and my youthful mind.

O Heavens! how awful is the might of souls,

And what they do within themselves while yet

The yoke of earth is new to them, the world

Nothing but a wild field where they were sown.

This is, in truth, heroic argument,

This genuine prowess, which I wished to touch

With hand however weak, but in the main

It lies far hidden from the reach of words.

Points have we all of us within our souls

Where all stand single; this I feel, and make

Breathings for incommunicable powers;

But is not each a memory to himself,

And, therefore, now that we must quit this theme,

I am not heartless, for there's not a man

That lives who hath not known his god-like hours,

And feels not what an empire we inherit

As natural beings in the strength of Nature.



﻿No more: for now into a populous plain

We must descend. A Traveller I am,

Whose tale is only of himself; even so,

So be it, if the pure of heart be prompt

To follow, and if thou, my honoured Friend!

Who in these thoughts art ever at my side,

Support, as heretofore, my fainting steps.



﻿It hath been told, that when the first delight

That flashed upon me from this novel show

Had failed, the mind returned into herself;

Yet true it is, that I had made a change

In climate, and my nature's outward coat

Changed also slowly and insensibly.

Full oft the quiet and exalted thoughts

Of loneliness gave way to empty noise

And superficial pastimes; now and then

Forced labour, and more frequently forced hopes;

And, worst of all, a treasonable growth

Of indecisive judgments, that impaired

And shook the mind's simplicity.—And yet

This was a gladsome time. Could I behold—

Who, less insensible than sodden clay

In a sea-river's bed at ebb of tide,

Could have beheld,—with undelighted heart,

So many happy youths, so wide and fair

A congregation in its budding-time

Of health, and hope, and beauty, all at once

So many divers samples from the growth

Of life's sweet season—could have seen unmoved

That miscellaneous garland of wild flowers

Decking the matron temples of a place

So famous through the world? To me, at least,

It was a goodly prospect: for, in sooth,

Though I had learnt betimes to stand unpropped,

And independent musings pleased me so

That spells seemed on me when I was alone,

Yet could I only cleave to solitude

In lonely places; if a throng was near

That way I leaned by nature; for my heart

Was social, and loved idleness and joy.



﻿Not seeking those who might participate

My deeper pleasures (nay, I had not once,

Though not unused to mutter lonesome songs,

Even with myself divided such delight,

Or looked that way for aught that might be clothed

In human language), easily I passed

From the remembrances of better things,

And slipped into the ordinary works

Of careless youth, unburthened, unalarmed.

Caverns there were within my mind which sun

Could never penetrate, yet did there not

Want store of leafy arbours where the light

Might enter in at will. Companionships,

Friendships, acquaintances, were welcome all.

We sauntered, played, or rioted; we talked

Unprofitable talk at morning hours;

Drifted about along the streets and walks,

Read lazily in trivial books, went forth

To gallop through the country in blind zeal

Of senseless horsemanship, or on the breast

Of Cam sailed boisterously, and let the stars

Come forth, perhaps without one quiet thought.



﻿Such was the tenor of the second act

In this new life. Imagination slept,

And yet not utterly. I could not print

Ground where the grass had yielded to the steps

Of generations of illustrious men,

Unmoved. I could not always lightly pass

Through the same gateways, sleep where they had slept,

Wake where they waked, range that inclosure old,

That garden of great intellects, undisturbed.

Place also by the side of this dark sense

Of noble feeling, that those spiritual men,

Even the great Newton's own ethereal self,

Seemed humbled in these precincts thence to be

The more endeared. Their several memories here

(Even like their persons in their portraits clothed

With the accustomed garb of daily life)

Put on a lowly and a touching grace

Of more distinct humanity, that left

All genuine admiration unimpaired.



﻿Beside the pleasant Mill of Trompington

I laughed with Chaucer in the hawthorn shade;

Heard him, while birds were warbling, tell his tales

Of amorous passion. And that gentle Bard,

Chosen by the Muses for their Page of State—

Sweet Spenser, moving through his clouded heaven

With the moon's beauty and the moon's soft pace,

I called him Brother, Englishman, and Friend!

Yea, our blind Poet, who, in his later day,

Stood almost single; uttering odious truth—

Darkness before, and danger's voice behind,

Soul awful—if the earth has ever lodged

An awful soul—I seemed to see him here

Familiarly, and in his scholar's dress

Bounding before me, yet a stripling youth—

A boy, no better, with his rosy cheeks

Angelical, keen eye, courageous look,

And conscious step of purity and pride.

Among the band of my compeers was one

Whom chance had stationed in the very room

Honoured by Milton's name. O temperate Bard!

Be it confest that, for the first time, seated

Within thy innocent lodge and oratory,

One of a festive circle, I poured out

Libations, to thy memory drank, till pride

And gratitude grew dizzy in a brain

Never excited by the fumes of wine

Before that hour, or since. Then, forth I ran

From the assembly; through a length of streets,

Ran, ostrich-like, to reach our chapel door

In not a desperate or opprobrious time,

Albeit long after the importunate bell

Had stopped, with wearisome Cassandra voice

No longer haunting the dark winter night.

Call back, O Friend! a moment to thy mind

The place itself and fashion of the rites.

With careless ostentation shouldering up

My surplice, through the inferior throng I clove

Of the plain Burghers, who in audience stood

On the last skirts of their permitted ground,

Under the pealing organ. Empty thoughts!

I am ashamed of them: and that great Bard,

And thou, O Friend! who in thy ample mind

Hast placed me high above my best deserts,

Ye will forgive the weakness of that hour,

In some of its unworthy vanities,

Brother to many more.

﻿In this mixed sort

The months passed on, remissly, not given up

To wilful alienation from the right,

Or walks of open scandal, but in vague

And loose indifference, easy likings, aims

Of a low pitch—duty and zeal dismissed,

Yet Nature, or a happy course of things

Not doing in their stead the needful work.

The memory languidly revolved, the heart

Reposed in noontide rest, the inner pulse

Of contemplation almost failed to beat.

Such life might not inaptly be compared

To a floating island, an amphibious spot

Unsound, of spongy texture, yet withal

Not wanting a fair face of water weeds

And pleasant flowers. The thirst of living praise,

Fit reverence for the glorious Dead, the sight

Of those long vistas, sacred catacombs,

Where mighty minds lie visibly entombed,

Have often stirred the heart of youth, and bred

A fervent love of rigorous discipline.—

Alas! such high emotion touched not me.

Look was there none within these walls to shame

My easy spirits, and discountenance

Their light composure, far less to instil

A calm resolve of mind, firmly addressed

To puissant efforts. Nor was this the blame

Of others but my own; I should, in truth,

As far as doth concern my single self,

Misdeem most widely, lodging it elsewhere:

For I, bred up 'mid Nature's luxuries,

Was a spoiled child, and rambling like the wind,

As I had done in daily intercourse

With those crystalline rivers, solemn heights,

And mountains, ranging like a fowl of the air,

I was ill-tutored for captivity;

To quit my pleasure, and, from month to month,

Take up a station calmly on the perch

Of sedentary peace. Those lovely forms

Had also left less space within my mind,

Which, wrought upon instinctively, had found

A freshness in those objects of her love,

A winning power, beyond all other power.

Not that I slighted books,—that were to lack

All sense,—but other passions in me ruled,

Passions more fervent, making me less prompt

To in-door study than was wise or well,

Or suited to those years. Yet I, though used

In magisterial liberty to rove,

Culling such flowers of learning as might tempt

A random choice, could shadow forth a place

(If now I yield not to a flattering dream)

Whose studious aspect should have bent me down

To instantaneous service; should at once

Have made me pay to science and to arts

And written lore, acknowledged my liege lord,

A homage frankly offered up, like that

Which I had paid to Nature. Toil and pains

In this recess, by thoughtful Fancy built,

Should spread from heart to heart; and stately groves,

Majestic edifices, should not want

A corresponding dignity within.

The congregating temper that pervades

Our unripe years, not wasted, should be taught

To minister to works of high attempt—

Works which the enthusiast would perform with love.

Youth should be awed, religiously possessed

With a conviction of the power that waits

On knowledge, when sincerely sought and prized

For its own sake, on glory and on praise

If but by labour won, and fit to endure

The passing day; should learn to put aside

Her trappings here, should strip them off abashed

Before antiquity and stedfast truth

And strong book-mindedness; and over all

A healthy sound simplicity should reign,

A seemly plainness, name it what you will,

Republican or pious.

﻿If these thoughts

Are a gratuitous emblazonry

That mocks the recreant age we live in, then

Be Folly and False-seeming free to affect

Whatever formal gait of discipline

Shall raise them highest in their own esteem—

Let them parade among the Schools at will,

But spare the House of God. Was ever known

The witless shepherd who persists to drive

A flock that thirsts not to a pool disliked?

A weight must surely hang on days begun

And ended with such mockery. Be wise,

Ye Presidents and Deans, and, till the spirit

Of ancient times revive, and youth be trained

At home in pious service, to your bells

Give seasonable rest, for 'tis a sound

Hollow as ever vexed the tranquil air;

And your officious doings bring disgrace

On the plain steeples of our English Church,

Whose worship, 'mid remotest village trees,

Suffers for this. Even Science, too, at hand

In daily sight of this irreverence,

Is smitten thence with an unnatural taint,

Loses her just authority, falls beneath

Collateral suspicion, else unknown.

This truth escaped me not, and I confess,

That having 'mid my native hills given loose

To a schoolboy's vision, I had raised a pile

Upon the basis of the coming time,

That fell in ruins round me. Oh, what joy

To see a sanctuary for our country's youth

Informed with such a spirit as might be

Its own protection; a primeval grove,

Where, though the shades with cheerfulness were filled,

Nor indigent of songs warbled from crowds

In under-coverts, yet the countenance

Of the whole place should bear a stamp of awe;

A habitation sober and demure

For ruminating creatures; a domain

For quiet things to wander in; a haunt

In which the heron should delight to feed

By the shy rivers, and the pelican

Upon the cypress spire in lonely thought

Might sit and sun himself.—Alas! Alas!

In vain for such solemnity I looked;

Mine eyes were crossed by butterflies, ears vexed

By chattering popinjays; the inner heart

Seemed trivial, and the impresses without

Of a too gaudy region.

﻿Different sight

Those venerable Doctors saw of old,

When all who dwelt within these famous walls

Led in abstemiousness a studious life;

When, in forlorn and naked chambers cooped

And crowded, o'er the ponderous books they hung

Like caterpillars eating out their way

In silence, or with keen devouring noise

Not to be tracked or fathered. Princes then

At matins froze, and couched at curfew-time,

Trained up through piety and zeal to prize

Spare diet, patient labour, and plain weeds.

O seat of Arts! renowned throughout the world!

Far different service in those homely days

The Muses' modest nurslings underwent

From their first childhood: in that glorious time

When Learning, like a stranger come from far,

Sounding through Christian lands her trumpet, roused

Peasant and king; when boys and youths, the growth

Of ragged villages and crazy huts,

Forsook their homes, and, errant in the quest

Of Patron, famous school or friendly nook,

Where, pensioned, they in shelter might sit down,

From town to town and through wide scattered realms

Journeyed with ponderous folios in their hands;

And often, starting from some covert place,

Saluted the chance comer on the road,

Crying, "An obolus, a penny give

To a poor scholar!"—when illustrious men,

Lovers of truth, by penury constrained,

Bucer, Erasmus, or Melancthon, read

Before the doors or windows of their cells

By moonshine through mere lack of taper light.



﻿But peace to vain regrets! We see but darkly

Even when we look behind us, and best things

Are not so pure by nature that they needs

Must keep to all, as fondly all believe,

Their highest promise. If the mariner,

When at reluctant distance he hath passed

Some tempting island, could but know the ills

That must have fallen upon him had he brought

His bark to land upon the wished-for shore,

Good cause would oft be his to thank the surf

Whose white belt scared him thence, or wind that blew

Inexorably adverse: for myself

I grieve not; happy is the gownèd youth,

Who only misses what I missed, who falls

No lower than I fell.

﻿I did not love,

Judging not ill perhaps, the timid course

Of our scholastic studies; could have wished

To see the river flow with ampler range

And freer pace; but more, far more, I grieved

To see displayed among an eager few,

Who in the field of contest persevered,

Passions unworthy of youth's generous heart

And mounting spirit, pitiably repaid,

When so disturbed, whatever palms are won.

From these I turned to travel with the shoal

Of more unthinking natures, easy minds

And pillowy; yet not wanting love that makes

The day pass lightly on, when foresight sleeps,

And wisdom and the pledges interchanged

With our own inner being are forgot.



﻿Yet was this deep vacation not given up

To utter waste. Hitherto I had stood

In my own mind remote from social life,

(At least from what we commonly so name,)

Like a lone shepherd on a promontory

Who lacking occupation looks far forth

Into the boundless sea, and rather makes

Than finds what he beholds. And sure it is,

That this first transit from the smooth delights

And wild outlandish walks of simple youth

To something that resembles an approach

Towards human business, to a privileged world

Within a world, a midway residence

With all its intervenient imagery,

Did better suit my visionary mind,

Far better, than to have been bolted forth,

Thrust out abruptly into Fortune's way

Among the conflicts of substantial life;

By a more just gradation did lead on

To higher things; more naturally matured,

For permanent possession, better fruits,

Whether of truth or virtue, to ensue.

In serious mood, but oftener, I confess,

With playful zest of fancy did we note

(How could we less?) the manners and the ways

Of those who lived distinguished by the badge

Of good or ill report; or those with whom

By frame of Academic discipline

We were perforce connected, men whose sway

And known authority of office served

To set our minds on edge, and did no more.

Nor wanted we rich pastime of this kind,

Found everywhere, but chiefly in the ring

Of the grave Elders, men unscoured, grotesque

In character, tricked out like aged trees

Which through the lapse of their infirmity

Give ready place to any random seed

That chooses to be reared upon their trunks.



﻿Here on my view, confronting vividly

Those shepherd swains whom I had lately left,

Appeared a different aspect of old age;

How different! yet both distinctly marked,

Objects embossed to catch the general eye,

Or portraitures for special use designed,

As some might seem, so aptly do they serve

To illustrate Nature's book of rudiments—

That book upheld as with maternal care

When she would enter on her tender scheme

Of teaching comprehension with delight,

And mingling playful with pathetic thoughts.



﻿The surfaces of artificial life

And manners finely wrought, the delicate race

Of colours, lurking, gleaming up and down

Through that state arras woven with silk and gold;

This wily interchange of snaky hues,

Willingly or unwillingly revealed,

I neither knew nor cared for; and as such

Were wanting here, I took what might be found

Of less elaborate fabric. At this day

I smile, in many a mountain solitude

Conjuring up scenes as obsolete in freaks

Of character, in points of wit as broad,

As aught by wooden images performed

For entertainment of the gaping crowd

At wake or fair. And oftentimes do flit

Remembrances before me of old men—

Old humourists, who have been long in their graves,

And having almost in my mind put off

Their human names, have into phantoms passed

Of texture midway between life and books.



﻿I play the loiterer: 'tis enough to note

That here in dwarf proportions were expressed

The limbs of the great world; its eager strifes

Collaterally pourtrayed, as in mock fight,

A tournament of blows, some hardly dealt

Though short of mortal combat; and whate'er

Might in this pageant be supposed to hit

An artless rustic's notice, this way less,

More that way, was not wasted upon me—

And yet the spectacle may well demand

A more substantial name, no mimic show,

Itself a living part of a live whole,

A creek in the vast sea; for, all degrees

And shapes of spurious fame and short-lived praise

Here sate in state, and fed with daily alms

Retainers won away from solid good;

And here was Labour, his own bond-slave; Hope,

That never set the pains against the prize;

Idleness halting with his weary clog,

And poor misguided Shame, and witless Fear,

And simple Pleasure foraging for Death;

Honour misplaced, and Dignity astray;

Feuds, factions, flatteries, enmity, and guile

Murmuring submission, and bald government,

(The idol weak as the idolator,)

And Decency and Custom starving Truth,

And blind Authority beating with his staff

The child that might have led him; Emptiness

Followed as of good omen, and meek Worth

Left to herself unheard of and unknown.



﻿Of these and other kindred notices

I cannot say what portion is in truth

The naked recollection of that time,

And what may rather have been called to life

By after-meditation. But delight

That, in an easy temper lulled asleep,

Is still with Innocence its own reward,

This was not wanting. Carelessly I roamed

As through a wide museum from whose stores

A casual rarity is singled out

And has its brief perusal, then gives way

To others, all supplanted in their turn;

Till 'mid this crowded neighbourhood of things

That are by nature most unneighbourly,

The head turns round and cannot right itself;

And though an aching and a barren sense

Of gay confusion still be uppermost,

With few wise longings and but little love,

Yet to the memory something cleaves at last,

Whence profit may be drawn in times to come.



﻿Thus in submissive idleness, my Friend!

The labouring time of autumn, winter, spring,

Eight months! rolled pleasingly away; the ninth

Came and returned me to my native hills.





BOOK FOURTH.





SUMMER VACATION.



Bright was the summer's noon when quickening steps

Followed each other till a dreary moor

Was crossed, a bare ridge clomb, upon whose top

Standing alone, as from a rampart's edge,

I overlooked the bed of Windermere,

Like a vast river, stretching in the sun.

With exultation, at my feet I saw

Lake, islands, promontories, gleaming bays,

A universe of Nature's fairest forms

Proudly revealed with instantaneous burst,

Magnificent, and beautiful, and gay.

I bounded down the hill shouting amain

For the old Ferryman; to the shout the rocks

Replied, and when the Charon of the flood

Had staid his oars, and touched the jutting pier,

I did not step into the well-known boat

Without a cordial greeting. Thence with speed

Up the familiar hill I took my way

Towards that sweet Valley(4) where I had been reared;

'Twas but a short hour's walk, ere veering round

I saw the snow-white church upon her hill

Sit like a thronèd Lady, sending out

A gracious look all over her domain.

Yon azure smoke betrays the lurking town;

With eager footsteps I advance and reach

The cottage threshold where my journey closed.

Glad welcome had I, with some tears, perhaps,

From my old Dame, so kind and motherly,

While she perused me with a parent's pride.

The thoughts of gratitude shall fall like dew

Upon thy grave, good creature! While my heart

Can beat never will I forget thy name.

Heaven's blessing be upon thee where thou liest

After thy innocent and busy stir

In narrow cares, thy little daily growth

Of calm enjoyments, after eighty years,

And more than eighty, of untroubled life,

Childless, yet by the strangers to thy blood

Honoured with little less than filial love.

What joy was mine to see thee once again,

Thee and thy dwelling, and a crowd of things

About its narrow precincts all beloved,

And many of them seeming yet my own!

Why should I speak of what a thousand hearts

Have felt, and every man alive can guess?

The rooms, the court, the garden were not left

Long unsaluted, nor the sunny seat

Round the stone table under the dark pine,

Friendly to studious or to festive hours;

Nor that unruly child of mountain birth,

The famous brook, who, soon as he was boxed

Within our garden, found himself at once,

As if by trick insidious and unkind,

Stripped of his voice and left to dimple down

(Without an effort and without a will)

A channel paved by man's officious care.

I looked at him and smiled, and smiled again,

And in the press of twenty thousand thoughts,

"Ha," quoth I, "pretty prisoner, are you there!"

Well might sarcastic Fancy then have whispered,

"An emblem here behold of thy own life;

In its late course of even days with all

Their smooth enthralment;" but the heart was full,

Too full for that reproach. My aged Dame

Walked proudly at my side: she guided me;

I willing, nay—nay, wishing to be led.

—The face of every neighbour whom I met

Was like a volume to me; some were hailed

Upon the road, some busy at their work,

Unceremonious greetings interchanged

With half the length of a long field between.

Among my schoolfellows I scattered round

Like recognitions, but with some constraint

Attended, doubtless, with a little pride,

But with more shame, for my habiliments,

The transformation wrought by gay attire.

Not less delighted did I take my place

At our domestic table: and, dear Friend!

In this endeavour simply to relate

A Poet's history, may I leave untold

The thankfulness with which I laid me down

In my accustomed bed, more welcome now

Perhaps than if it had been more desired

Or been more often thought of with regret;

That lowly bed whence I had heard the wind

Roar and the rain beat hard, where I so oft

Had lain awake on summer nights to watch

The moon in splendour couched among the leaves

Of a tall ash, that near our cottage stood;

Had watched her with fixed eyes while to and fro

In the dark summit of the waving tree

She rocked with every impulse of the breeze.



﻿Among the favourites whom it pleased me well

To see again, was one by ancient right

Our inmate, a rough terrier of the hills;

By birth and call of nature pre-ordained

To hunt the badger and unearth the fox

Among the impervious crags, but having been

From youth our own adopted, he had passed

Into a gentler service. And when first

The boyish spirit flagged, and day by day

Along my veins I kindled with the stir,

The fermentation, and the vernal heat

Of poesy, affecting private shades

Like a sick Lover, then this dog was used

To watch me, an attendant and a friend,

Obsequious to my steps early and late,

Though often of such dilatory walk

Tired, and uneasy at the halts I made.

A hundred times when, roving high and low,

I have been harassed with the toil of verse,

Much pains and little progress, and at once

Some lovely Image in the song rose up

Full-formed, like Venus rising from the sea;

Then have I darted forwards to let loose

My hand upon his back with stormy joy,

Caressing him again and yet again.

And when at evening on the public way

I sauntered, like a river murmuring

And talking to itself when all things else

Are still, the creature trotted on before;

Such was his custom; but whene'er he met

A passenger approaching, he would turn

To give me timely notice, and straightway,

Grateful for that admonishment, I hushed

My voice, composed my gait, and, with the air

And mien of one whose thoughts are free, advanced

To give and take a greeting that might save

My name from piteous rumours, such as wait

On men suspected to be crazed in brain.



﻿Those walks well worthy to be prized and loved—

Regretted!—that word, too, was on my tongue,

But they were richly laden with all good,

And cannot be remembered but with thanks

And gratitude, and perfect joy of heart—

Those walks in all their freshness now came back

Like a returning Spring. When first I made

Once more the circuit of our little lake,

If ever happiness hath lodged with man,

That day consummate happiness was mine,

Wide-spreading, steady, calm, contemplative.

The sun was set, or setting, when I left

Our cottage door, and evening soon brought on

A sober hour, not winning or serene,

For cold and raw the air was, and untuned;

But as a face we love is sweetest then

When sorrow damps it, or, whatever look

It chance to wear, is sweetest if the heart

Have fulness in herself; even so with me

It fared that evening. Gently did my soul

Put off her veil, and, self-transmuted, stood

Naked, as in the presence of her God.

While on I walked, a comfort seemed to touch

A heart that had not been disconsolate:

Strength came where weakness was not known to be,

At least not felt; and restoration came

Like an intruder knocking at the door

Of unacknowledged weariness. I took

The balance, and with firm hand weighed myself.

—Of that external scene which round me lay,

Little, in this abstraction, did I see;

Remembered less; but I had inward hopes

And swellings of the spirit, was rapt and soothed,

Conversed with promises, had glimmering views

How life pervades the undecaying mind;

How the immortal soul with God-like power

Informs, creates, and thaws the deepest sleep

That time can lay upon her; how on earth,

Man, if he do but live within the light

Of high endeavours, daily spreads abroad

His being armed with strength that cannot fail.

Nor was there want of milder thoughts, of love

Of innocence, and holiday repose;

And more than pastoral quiet, 'mid the stir

Of boldest projects, and a peaceful end

At last, or glorious, by endurance won.

Thus musing, in a wood I sate me down

Alone, continuing there to muse: the slopes

And heights meanwhile were slowly overspread

With darkness, and before a rippling breeze

The long lake lengthened out its hoary line,

And in the sheltered coppice where I sate,

Around me from among the hazel leaves,

Now here, now there, moved by the straggling wind,

Came ever and anon a breath-like sound,

Quick as the pantings of the faithful dog,

The off and on companion of my walk;

And such, at times, believing them to be,

I turned my head to look if he were there;

Then into solemn thought I passed once more.



﻿A freshness also found I at this time

In human Life, the daily life of those

Whose occupations really I loved;

The peaceful scene oft filled me with surprise

Changed like a garden in the heat of spring

After an eight-days' absence. For (to omit

The things which were the same and yet appeared

Far otherwise) amid this rural solitude,

A narrow Vale where each was known to all,

'Twas not indifferent to a youthful mind

To mark some sheltering bower or sunny nook,

Where an old man had used to sit alone,

Now vacant; pale-faced babes whom I had left

In arms, now rosy prattlers at the feet

Of a pleased grandame tottering up and down;

And growing girls whose beauty, filched away

With all its pleasant promises, was gone

To deck some slighted playmate's homely cheek.



Yes, I had something of a subtler sense,

And often looking round was moved to smiles

Such as a delicate work of humour breeds;

I read, without design, the opinions, thoughts,

Of those plain-living people now observed

With clearer knowledge; with another eye

I saw the quiet woodman in the woods,

The shepherd roam the hills. With new delight,

This chiefly, did I note my grey-haired Dame;

Saw her go forth to church or other work

Of state, equipped in monumental trim;

Short velvet cloak, (her bonnet of the like),

A mantle such as Spanish Cavaliers

Wore in old time. Her smooth domestic life,

Affectionate without disquietude,

Her talk, her business, pleased me; and no less

Her clear though shallow stream of piety

That ran on Sabbath days a fresher course;

With thoughts unfelt till now I saw her read

Her Bible on hot Sunday afternoons,

And loved the book, when she had dropped asleep

And made of it a pillow for her head.



﻿Nor less do I remember to have felt,

Distinctly manifested at this time,

A human-heartedness about my love

For objects hitherto the absolute wealth

Of my own private being and no more:

Which I had loved, even as a blessed spirit

Or Angel, if he were to dwell on earth,

Might love in individual happiness.

But now there opened on me other thoughts

Of change, congratulation or regret,

A pensive feeling! It spread far and wide;

The trees, the mountains shared it, and the brooks,

The stars of Heaven, now seen in their old haunts—

White Sirius glittering o'er the southern crags,

Orion with his belt, and those fair Seven,

Acquaintances of every little child,

And Jupiter, my own beloved star!

Whatever shadings of mortality,

Whatever imports from the world of death

Had come among these objects heretofore,

Were, in the main, of mood less tender: strong,

Deep, gloomy were they, and severe; the scatterings

Of awe or tremulous dread, that had given way

In later youth to yearnings of a love

Enthusiastic, to delight and hope.



﻿As one who hangs down-bending from the side

Of a slow-moving boat, upon the breast

Of a still water, solacing himself

With such discoveries as his eye can make

Beneath him in the bottom of the deep,

Sees many beauteous sights—weeds, fishes, flowers,

Grots, pebbles, roots of trees, and fancies more,

Yet often is perplexed and cannot part

The shadow from the substance, rocks and sky,

Mountains and clouds, reflected in the depth

Of the clear flood, from things which there abide

In their true dwelling; now is crossed by gleam

Of his own image, by a sun-beam now,

And wavering motions sent he knows not whence,

Impediments that make his task more sweet;

Such pleasant office have we long pursued

Incumbent o'er the surface of past time

With like success, nor often have appeared

Shapes fairer or less doubtfully discerned

Than these to which the Tale, indulgent Friend!

Would now direct thy notice. Yet in spite

Of pleasure won, and knowledge not withheld,

There was an inner falling off—I loved,

Loved deeply all that had been loved before,

More deeply even than ever: but a swarm

Of heady schemes jostling each other, gawds,

And feast and dance, and public revelry,

And sports and games (too grateful in themselves,

Yet in themselves less grateful, I believe,

Than as they were a badge glossy and fresh

Of manliness and freedom) all conspired

To lure my mind from firm habitual quest

Of feeding pleasures, to depress the zeal

And damp those yearnings which had once been mine—

A wild, unworldly-minded youth, given up

To his own eager thoughts. It would demand

Some skill, and longer time than may be spared,

To paint these vanities, and how they wrought

In haunts where they, till now, had been unknown.

It seemed the very garments that I wore

Preyed on my strength, and stopped the quiet stream

Of self-forgetfulness.

﻿Yes, that heartless chase

Of trivial pleasures was a poor exchange

For books and nature at that early age.

'Tis true, some casual knowledge might be gained

Of character or life; but at that time,

Of manners put to school I took small note,

And all my deeper passions lay elsewhere.

Far better had it been to exalt the mind

By solitary study, to uphold

Intense desire through meditative peace;

And yet, for chastisement of these regrets,

The memory of one particular hour

Doth here rise up against me. 'Mid a throng

Of maids and youths, old men, and matrons staid,

A medley of all tempers, I had passed

The night in dancing, gaiety, and mirth,

With din of instruments and shuffling feet,

And glancing forms, and tapers glittering,

And unaimed prattle flying up and down;

Spirits upon the stretch, and here and there

Slight shocks of young love-liking interspersed,

Whose transient pleasure mounted to the head,

And tingled through the veins. Ere we retired,

The cock had crowed, and now the eastern sky

Was kindling, not unseen, from humble copse

And open field, through which the pathway wound,

And homeward led my steps. Magnificent

The morning rose, in memorable pomp,

Glorious as e'er I had beheld—in front,

The sea lay laughing at a distance; near,

The solid mountains shone, bright as the clouds,

Grain-tinctured, drenched in empyrean light;

And in the meadows and the lower grounds

Was all the sweetness of a common dawn—

Dews, vapours, and the melody of birds,

And labourers going forth to till the fields.

﻿Ah! need I say, dear Friend! that to the brim

My heart was full; I made no vows, but vows

Were then made for me; bond unknown to me

Was given, that I should be, else sinning greatly,

A dedicated Spirit. On I walked

In thankful blessedness, which yet survives.



﻿Strange rendezvous! My mind was at that time

A parti-coloured show of grave and gay,

Solid and light, short-sighted and profound;

Of inconsiderate habits and sedate,

Consorting in one mansion unreproved.

The worth I knew of powers that I possessed,

Though slighted and too oft misused. Besides,

That summer, swarming as it did with thoughts

Transient and idle, lacked not intervals

When Folly from the frown of fleeting Time

Shrunk, and the mind experienced in herself

Conformity as just as that of old

To the end and written spirit of God's works,

Whether held forth in Nature or in Man,

Through pregnant vision, separate or conjoined.



﻿When from our better selves we have too long

Been parted by the hurrying world, and droop,

Sick of its business, of its pleasures tired,

How gracious, how benign, is Solitude;

How potent a mere image of her sway;

Most potent when impressed upon the mind

With an appropriate human centre—hermit,

Deep in the bosom of the wilderness;

Votary (in vast cathedral, where no foot

Is treading, where no other face is seen)

Kneeling at prayers; or watchman on the top

Of lighthouse, beaten by Atlantic waves;

Or as the soul of that great Power is met

Sometimes embodied on a public road,

When, for the night deserted, it assumes

A character of quiet more profound

Than pathless wastes.

﻿Once, when those summer months

Were flown, and autumn brought its annual show

Of oars with oars contending, sails with sails,

Upon Winander's spacious breast, it chanced

That—after I had left a flower-decked room

(Whose in-door pastime, lighted up, survived

To a late hour), and spirits overwrought

Were making night do penance for a day

Spent in a round of strenuous idleness—

My homeward course led up a long ascent,

Where the road's watery surface, to the top

Of that sharp rising, glittered to the moon

And bore the semblance of another stream

Stealing with silent lapse to join the brook

That murmured in the vale. All else was still;

No living thing appeared in earth or air,

And, save the flowing water's peaceful voice,

Sound there was none—but, lo! an uncouth shape,

Shown by a sudden turning of the road,

So near that, slipping back into the shade

Of a thick hawthorn, I could mark him well,

Myself unseen. He was of stature tall,

A span above man's common measure, tall,

Stiff, lank, and upright; a more meagre man

Was never seen before by night or day.

Long were his arms, pallid his hands; his mouth

Looked ghastly in the moonlight: from behind,

A mile-stone propped him; I could also ken

That he was clothed in military garb,

Though faded, yet entire. Companionless,

No dog attending, by no staff sustained,

He stood, and in his very dress appeared

A desolation, a simplicity,

To which the trappings of a gaudy world

Make a strange back-ground. From his lips, ere long,

Issued low muttered sounds, as if of pain

Or some uneasy thought; yet still his form

Kept the same awful steadiness—at his feet

His shadow lay, and moved not. From self-blame

Not wholly free, I watched him thus; at length

Subduing my heart's specious cowardice,

I left the shady nook where I had stood

And hailed him. Slowly from his resting-place

He rose, and with a lean and wasted arm

In measured gesture lifted to his head

Returned my salutation; then resumed

His station as before; and when I asked

His history, the veteran, in reply,

Was neither slow nor eager; but, unmoved,

And with a quiet uncomplaining voice,

A stately air of mild indifference,

He told in few plain words a soldier's tale—

That in the Tropic Islands he had served,

Whence he had landed scarcely three weeks past;

That on his landing he had been dismissed,

And now was travelling towards his native home.

This heard, I said, in pity, "Come with me."

He stooped, and straightway from the ground took up

An oaken staff by me yet unobserved—

A staff which must have dropt from his slack hand

And lay till now neglected in the grass.

Though weak his step and cautious, he appeared

To travel without pain, and I beheld,

With an astonishment but ill suppressed,

His ghostly figure moving at my side;

Nor could I, while we journeyed thus, forbear

To turn from present hardships to the past,

And speak of war, battle, and pestilence,

Sprinkling this talk with questions, better spared,

On what he might himself have seen or felt.

He all the while was in demeanour calm,

Concise in answer; solemn and sublime

He might have seemed, but that in all he said

There was a strange half-absence, as of one

Knowing too well the importance of his theme,

But feeling it no longer. Our discourse

Soon ended, and together on we passed

In silence through a wood gloomy and still.

Up-turning, then, along an open field,

We reached a cottage. At the door I knocked,

And earnestly to charitable care

Commended him as a poor friendless man,

Belated and by sickness overcome.

Assured that now the traveller would repose

In comfort, I entreated that henceforth

He would not linger in the public ways,

But ask for timely furtherance and help

Such as his state required. At this reproof,

With the same ghastly mildness in his look,

He said, "My trust is in the God of Heaven,

And in the eye of him who passes me!"



﻿The cottage door was speedily unbarred,

And now the soldier touched his hat once more

With his lean hand, and in a faltering voice,

Whose tone bespake reviving interests

Till then unfelt, he thanked me; I returned

The farewell blessing of the patient man,

And so we parted. Back I cast a look,

And lingered near the door a little space,

Then sought with quiet heart my distant home.





BOOK FIFTH.





BOOKS.



When Contemplation, like the night-calm felt

Through earth and sky, spreads widely, and sends deep

Into the soul its tranquillising power,

Even then I sometimes grieve for thee, O Man,

Earth's paramount Creature! not so much for woes

That thou endurest; heavy though that weight be,

Cloud-like it mounts, or touched with light divine

Doth melt away; but for those palms achieved,

Through length of time, by patient exercise

Of study and hard thought; there, there, it is

That sadness finds its fuel. Hitherto,

In progress through this Verse, my mind hath looked

Upon the speaking face of earth and heaven

As her prime teacher, intercourse with man

Established by the sovereign Intellect,

Who through that bodily image hath diffused,

As might appear to the eye of fleeting time,

A deathless spirit. Thou also, man! hast wrought,

For commerce of thy nature with herself,

Things that aspire to unconquerable life;

And yet we feel—we cannot choose but feel—

That they must perish. Tremblings of the heart

It gives, to think that our immortal being

No more shall need such garments; and yet man,

As long as he shall be the child of earth,

Might almost "weep to have" what he may lose,

Nor be himself extinguished, but survive,

Abject, depressed, forlorn, disconsolate.

A thought is with me sometimes, and I say,—

Should the whole frame of earth by inward throes

Be wrenched, or fire come down from far to scorch

Her pleasant habitations, and dry up

Old Ocean, in his bed left singed and bare,

Yet would the living Presence still subsist

Victorious, and composure would ensue,

And kindlings like the morning—presage sure

Of day returning and of life revived.

But all the meditations of mankind,

Yea, all the adamantine holds of truth

By reason built, or passion, which itself

Is highest reason in a soul sublime;

The consecrated works of Bard and Sage,

Sensuous or intellectual, wrought by men,

Twin labourers and heirs of the same hopes;

Where would they be? Oh! why hath not the Mind

Some element to stamp her image on

In nature somewhat nearer to her own?

Why, gifted with such powers to send abroad

Her spirit, must it lodge in shrines so frail?



﻿One day, when from my lips a like complaint

Had fallen in presence of a studious friend,

He with a smile made answer, that in truth

'Twas going far to seek disquietude;

But on the front of his reproof confessed

That he himself had oftentimes given way

To kindred hauntings. Whereupon I told,

That once in the stillness of a summer's noon,

While I was seated in a rocky cave

By the sea-side, perusing, so it chanced,

The famous history of the errant knight

Recorded by Cervantes, these same thoughts

Beset me, and to height unusual rose,

While listlessly I sate, and, having closed

The book, had turned my eyes toward the wide sea.

On poetry and geometric truth,

And their high privilege of lasting life,

From all internal injury exempt,

I mused, upon these chiefly: and at length,

My senses yielding to the sultry air,

Sleep seized me, and I passed into a dream.

I saw before me stretched a boundless plain

Of sandy wilderness, all black and void,

And as I looked around, distress and fear

Came creeping over me, when at my side,

Close at my side, an uncouth shape appeared

Upon a dromedary, mounted high.

He seemed an Arab of the Bedouin tribes:

A lance he bore, and underneath one arm

A stone, and in the opposite hand a shell

Of a surpassing brightness. At the sight

Much I rejoiced, not doubting but a guide

Was present, one who with unerring skill

Would through the desert lead me; and while yet

I looked and looked, self-questioned what this freight

Which the new-comer carried through the waste

Could mean, the Arab told me that the stone

(To give it in the language of the dream)

Was "Euclid's Elements;" and "This," said he,

"Is something of more worth;" and at the word

Stretched forth the shell, so beautiful in shape,

In colour so resplendent, with command

That I should hold it to my ear. I did so,

And heard that instant in an unknown tongue,

Which yet I understood, articulate sounds,

A loud prophetic blast of harmony;

An Ode, in passion uttered, which foretold

Destruction to the children of the earth

By deluge, now at hand. No sooner ceased

The song, than the Arab with calm look declared

That all would come to pass of which the voice

Had given forewarning, and that he himself

Was going then to bury those two books:

The one that held acquaintance with the stars,

And wedded soul to soul in purest bond

Of reason, undisturbed by space or time;

The other that was a god, yea many gods,

Had voices more than all the winds, with power

To exhilarate the spirit, and to soothe,

Through every clime, the heart of human kind.

While this was uttering, strange as it may seem,

I wondered not, although I plainly saw

The one to be a stone, the other a shell;

Nor doubted once but that they both were books,

Having a perfect faith in all that passed.

Far stronger, now, grew the desire I felt

To cleave unto this man; but when I prayed

To share his enterprise, he hurried on

Reckless of me: I followed, not unseen,

For oftentimes he cast a backward look,

Grasping his twofold treasure.—Lance in rest,

He rode, I keeping pace with him; and now

He, to my fancy, had become the knight

Whose tale Cervantes tells; yet not the knight,

But was an Arab of the desert too;

Of these was neither, and was both at once.

His countenance, meanwhile, grew more disturbed;

And, looking backwards when he looked, mine eyes

Saw, over half the wilderness diffused,

A bed of glittering light: I asked the cause:

"It is," said he, "the waters of the deep

Gathering upon us;" quickening then the pace

Of the unwieldly creature he bestrode,

He left me: I called after him aloud;

He heeded not; but, with his twofold charge

Still in his grasp, before me, full in view,

Went hurrying o'er the illimitable waste,

With the fleet waters of a drowning world

In chase of him; whereat I waked in terror,

And saw the sea before me, and the book,

In which I had been reading, at my side.



﻿Full often, taking from the world of sleep

This Arab phantom, which I thus beheld,

This semi-Quixote, I to him have given

A substance, fancied him a living man,

A gentle dweller in the desert, crazed

By love and feeling, and internal thought

Protracted among endless solitudes;

Have shaped him wandering upon this quest!

Nor have I pitied him; but rather felt

Reverence was due to a being thus employed;

And thought that, in the blind and awful lair

Of such a madness, reason did lie couched.

Enow there are on earth to take in charge

Their wives, their children, and their virgin loves,

Or whatsoever else the heart holds dear;

Enow to stir for these; yea, will I say,

Contemplating in soberness the approach

Of an event so dire, by signs in earth

Or heaven made manifest, that I could share

That maniac's fond anxiety, and go

Upon like errand. Oftentimes at least

Me hath such strong entrancement overcome,

When I have held a volume in my hand,

Poor earthly casket of immortal verse,

Shakespeare, or Milton, labourers divine!



﻿Great and benign, indeed, must be the power

Of living nature, which could thus so long

Detain me from the best of other guides

And dearest helpers, left unthanked, unpraised,

Even in the time of lisping infancy;

And later down, in prattling childhood even,

While I was travelling back among those days,

How could I ever play an ingrate's part?

Once more should I have made those bowers resound,

By intermingling strains of thankfulness

With their own thoughtless melodies; at least

It might have well beseemed me to repeat

Some simply fashioned tale, to tell again,

In slender accents of sweet verse, some tale

That did bewitch me then, and soothes me now.

O Friend! O Poet! brother of my soul,

Think not that I could pass along untouched

By these remembrances. Yet wherefore speak?

Why call upon a few weak words to say

What is already written in the hearts

Of all that breathe?—what in the path of all

Drops daily from the tongue of every child,

Wherever man is found? The trickling tear

Upon the cheek of listening Infancy

Proclaims it, and the insuperable look

That drinks as if it never could be full.



﻿That portion of my story I shall leave

There registered: whatever else of power

Or pleasure sown, or fostered thus, may be

Peculiar to myself, let that remain

Where still it works, though hidden from all search

Among the depths of time. Yet is it just

That here, in memory of all books which lay

Their sure foundations in the heart of man,

Whether by native prose, or numerous verse,

That in the name of all inspirèd souls,

From Homer the great Thunderer, from the voice

That roars along the bed of Jewish song,

And that more varied and elaborate,

Those trumpet-tones of harmony that shake

Our shores in England,—from those loftiest notes

Down to the low and wren-like warblings, made

For cottagers and spinners at the wheel,

And sun-burnt travellers resting their tired limbs,

Stretched under wayside hedge-rows, ballad tunes,

Food for the hungry ears of little ones,

And of old men who have survived their joys:

'Tis just that in behalf of these, the works,

And of the men that framed them, whether known,

Or sleeping nameless in their scattered graves,

That I should here assert their rights, attest

Their honours, and should, once for all, pronounce

Their benediction; speak of them as Powers

For ever to be hallowed; only less,

For what we are and what we may become,

Than Nature's self, which is the breath of God,

Or His pure Word by miracle revealed.



﻿Rarely and with reluctance would I stoop

To transitory themes; yet I rejoice,

And, by these thoughts admonished, will pour out

Thanks with uplifted heart, that I was reared

Safe from an evil which these days have laid

Upon the children of the land, a pest

That might have dried me up, body and soul.

This verse is dedicate to Nature's self,

And things that teach as Nature teaches: then,

Oh! where had been the Man, the Poet where,

Where had we been, we two, beloved Friend!

If in the season of unperilous choice,

In lieu of wandering, as we did, through vales

Rich with indigenous produce, open ground

Of Fancy, happy pastures ranged at will,

We had been followed, hourly watched, and noosed,

Each in his several melancholy walk

Stringed like a poor man's heifer at its feed,

Led through the lanes in forlorn servitude;

Or rather like a stallèd ox debarred

From touch of growing grass, that may not taste

A flower till it have yielded up its sweets

A prelibation to the mower's scythe.



﻿Behold the parent hen amid her brood,

Though fledged and feathered, and well pleased to part

And straggle from her presence, still a brood,

And she herself from the maternal bond

Still undischarged; yet doth she little more

Than move with them in tenderness and love,

A centre to the circle which they make;

And now and then, alike from need of theirs

And call of her own natural appetites,

She scratches, ransacks up the earth for food,

Which they partake at pleasure. Early died

My honoured Mother, she who was the heart

And hinge of all our learnings and our loves:

She left us destitute, and, as we might,

Trooping together. Little suits it me

To break upon the sabbath of her rest

With any thought that looks at others' blame;

Nor would I praise her but in perfect love.

Hence am I checked: but let me boldly say,

In gratitude, and for the sake of truth,

Unheard by her, that she, not falsely taught,

Fetching her goodness rather from times past,

Than shaping novelties for times to come,

Had no presumption, no such jealousy,

Nor did by habit of her thoughts mistrust

Our nature, but had virtual faith that He

Who fills the mother's breast with innocent milk,

Doth also for our nobler part provide,

Under His great correction and control,

As innocent instincts, and as innocent food;

Or draws for minds that are left free to trust

In the simplicities of opening life

Sweet honey out of spurned or dreaded weeds.

This was her creed, and therefore she was pure

From anxious fear of error or mishap,

And evil, overweeningly so called;

Was not puffed up by false unnatural hopes,

Nor selfish with unnecessary cares,

Nor with impatience from the season asked

More than its timely produce; rather loved

The hours for what they are, than from regard

Glanced on their promises in restless pride.

Such was she—not from faculties more strong

Than others have, but from the times, perhaps,

And spot in which she lived, and through a grace

Of modest meekness, simple-mindedness,

A heart that found benignity and hope,

Being itself benign.

﻿My drift I fear

Is scarcely obvious; but, that common sense

May try this modern system by its fruits,

Leave let me take to place before her sight

A specimen pourtrayed with faithful hand.

Full early trained to worship seemliness,

This model of a child is never known

To mix in quarrels; that were far beneath

Its dignity; with gifts he bubbles o'er

As generous as a fountain; selfishness

May not come near him, nor the little throng

Of flitting pleasures tempt him from his path;

The wandering beggars propagate his name,

Dumb creatures find him tender as a nun,

And natural or supernatural fear,

Unless it leap upon him in a dream,

Touches him not. To enhance the wonder, see

How arch his notices, how nice his sense

Of the ridiculous; not blind is he

To the broad follies of the licensed world,

Yet innocent himself withal, though shrewd,

And can read lectures upon innocence;

A miracle of scientific lore,

Ships he can guide across the pathless sea,

And tell you all their cunning; he can read

The inside of the earth, and spell the stars;

He knows the policies of foreign lands;

Can string you names of districts, cities, towns,

The whole world over, tight as beads of dew

Upon a gossamer thread; he sifts, he weighs;

All things are put to question; he must live

Knowing that he grows wiser every day

Or else not live at all, and seeing too

Each little drop of wisdom as it falls

Into the dimpling cistern of his heart:

For this unnatural growth the trainer blame,

Pity the tree.—Poor human vanity,

Wert thou extinguished, little would be left

Which he could truly love; but how escape?

For, ever as a thought of purer birth

Rises to lead him toward a better clime,

Some intermeddler still is on the watch

To drive him back, and pound him, like a stray,

Within the pinfold of his own conceit.

Meanwhile old grandame earth is grieved to find

The playthings, which her love designed for him,

Unthought of: in their woodland beds the flowers

Weep, and the river sides are all forlorn.

Oh! give us once again the wishing cap

Of Fortunatus, and the invisible coat

Of Jack the Giant-killer, Robin Hood,

And Sabra in the forest with St. George!

The child, whose love is here, at least, doth reap

One precious gain, that he forgets himself.



﻿These mighty workmen of our later age,

Who, with a broad highway, have overbridged

The froward chaos of futurity,

Tamed to their bidding; they who have the skill

To manage books, and things, and make them act

On infant minds as surely as the sun

Deals with a flower; the keepers of our time,

The guides and wardens of our faculties,

Sages who in their prescience would control

All accidents, and to the very road

Which they have fashioned would confine us down,

Like engines; when will their presumption learn,

That in the unreasoning progress of the world

A wiser spirit is at work for us,

A better eye than theirs, most prodigal

Of blessings, and most studious of our good,

Even in what seem our most unfruitful hours?



﻿(5) There was a Boy: ye knew him well, ye cliffs

And islands of Winander!—many a time

At evening, when the earliest stars began

To move along the edges of the hills,

Rising or setting, would he stand alone

Beneath the trees or by the glimmering lake,

And there, with fingers interwoven, both hands

Pressed closely palm to palm, and to his mouth

Uplifted, he, as through an instrument,

Blew mimic hootings to the silent owls,

That they might answer him; and they would shout

Across the watery vale, and shout again,

Responsive to his call, with quivering peals,

And long halloos and screams, and echoes loud,

Redoubled and redoubled, concourse wild

Of jocund din; and, when a lengthened pause

Of silence came and baffled his best skill,

Then sometimes, in that silence while he hung

Listening, a gentle shock of mild surprise

Has carried far into his heart the voice

Of mountain torrents; or the visible scene

Would enter unawares into his mind,

With all its solemn imagery, its rocks,

Its woods, and that uncertain heaven, received

Into the bosom of the steady lake.



﻿This Boy was taken from his mates, and died

In childhood, ere he was full twelve years old.

Fair is the spot, most beautiful the vale

Where he was born; the grassy churchyard hangs

Upon a slope above the village school,

And through that churchyard when my way has led

On summer evenings, I believe that there

A long half hour together I have stood

Mute, looking at the grave in which he lies!

Even now appears before the mind's clear eye

That self-same village church; I see her sit

(The throned Lady whom erewhile we hailed)

On her green hill, forgetful of this Boy

Who slumbers at her feet,—forgetful, too,

Of all her silent neighbourhood of graves,

And listening only to the gladsome sounds

That, from the rural school ascending, play

Beneath her and about her. May she long

Behold a race of young ones like to those

With whom I herded!—(easily, indeed,

We might have fed upon a fatter soil

Of arts and letters—but be that forgiven)—

A race of real children; not too wise,

Too learned, or too good; but wanton, fresh,

And bandied up and down by love and hate;

Not unresentful where self-justified;

Fierce, moody, patient, venturous, modest, shy;

Mad at their sports like withered leaves in winds;

Though doing wrong and suffering, and full oft

Bending beneath our life's mysterious weight

Of pain, and doubt, and fear, yet yielding not

In happiness to the happiest upon earth.

Simplicity in habit, truth in speech,

Be these the daily strengtheners of their minds;

May books and Nature be their early joy!

And knowledge, rightly honoured with that name—

Knowledge not purchased by the loss of power!



﻿Well do I call to mind the very week

When I was first intrusted to the care

Of that sweet Valley; when its paths, its shores,

And brooks were like a dream of novelty

To my half-infant thoughts; that very week,

While I was roving up and down alone,

Seeking I knew not what, I chanced to cross

One of those open fields, which, shaped like ears,

Make green peninsulas on Esthwaite's Lake:

Twilight was coming on, yet through the gloom

Appeared distinctly on the opposite shore

A heap of garments, as if left by one

Who might have there been bathing. Long I watched,

But no one owned them; meanwhile the calm lake

Grew dark with all the shadows on its breast,

And, now and then, a fish up-leaping snapped

The breathless stillness. The succeeding day,

Those unclaimed garments telling a plain tale

Drew to the spot an anxious crowd; some looked

In passive expectation from the shore,

While from a boat others hung o'er the deep,

Sounding with grappling irons and long poles.

At last, the dead man, 'mid that beauteous scene

Of trees and hills and water, bolt upright

Rose, with his ghastly face, a spectre shape

Of terror; yet no soul-debasing fear,

Young as I was, a child not nine years old,

Possessed me, for my inner eye had seen

Such sights before, among the shining streams

Of faëry land, the forest of romance.

Their spirit hallowed the sad spectacle

With decoration of ideal grace;

A dignity, a smoothness, like the works

Of Grecian art, and purest poesy.



﻿A precious treasure had I long possessed,

A little yellow, canvas-covered book,

A slender abstract of the Arabian tales;

And, from companions in a new abode,

When first I learnt, that this dear prize of mine

Was but a block hewn from a mighty quarry—

That there were four large volumes, laden all

With kindred matter, 'twas to me, in truth,

A promise scarcely earthly. Instantly,

With one not richer than myself, I made

A covenant that each should lay aside

The moneys he possessed, and hoard up more,

Till our joint savings had amassed enough

To make this book our own. Through several months,

In spite of all temptation, we preserved

Religiously that vow; but firmness failed,

Nor were we ever masters of our wish.



﻿And when thereafter to my father's house

The holidays returned me, there to find

That golden store of books which I had left,

What joy was mine! How often in the course

Of those glad respites, though a soft west wind

Ruffled the waters to the angler's wish

For a whole day together, have I lain

Down by thy side, O Derwent! murmuring stream,

On the hot stones, and in the glaring sun,

And there have read, devouring as I read,

Defrauding the day's glory, desperate!

Till with a sudden bound of smart reproach,

Such as an idler deals with in his shame,

I to the sport betook myself again.



﻿A gracious spirit o'er this earth presides,

And o'er the heart of man: invisibly

It comes, to works of unreproved delight,

And tendency benign, directing those

Who care not, know not, think not what they do.

The tales that charm away the wakeful night

In Araby, romances; legends penned

For solace by dim light of monkish lamps;

Fictions, for ladies of their love, devised

By youthful squires; adventures endless, spun

By the dismantled warrior in old age,

Out of the bowels of those very schemes

In which his youth did first extravagate;

These spread like day, and something in the shape

Of these will live till man shall be no more.

Dumb yearnings, hidden appetites, are ours,

And they must have their food. Our childhood sits,

Our simple childhood, sits upon a throne

That hath more power than all the elements.

I guess not what this tells of Being past,

Nor what it augurs of the life to come;

But so it is, and, in that dubious hour,

That twilight when we first begin to see

This dawning earth, to recognise, expect,

And in the long probation that ensues,

The time of trial, ere we learn to live

In reconcilement with our stinted powers;

To endure this state of meagre vassalage,

Unwilling to forego, confess, submit,

Uneasy and unsettled, yoke-fellows

To custom, mettlesome, and not yet tamed

And humbled down; oh! then we feel, we feel,

We know where we have friends. Ye dreamers, then,

Forgers of daring tales! we bless you then,

Impostors, drivellers, dotards, as the ape

Philosophy will call you: then we feel

With what, and how great might ye are in league,

Who make our wish, our power, our thought a deed,

An empire, a possession,—ye whom time

And seasons serve; all Faculties to whom

Earth crouches, the elements are potter's clay,

Space like a heaven filled up with northern lights,

Here, nowhere, there, and everywhere at once.



﻿Relinquishing this lofty eminence

For ground, though humbler, not the less a tract

Of the same isthmus, which our spirits cross

In progress from their native continent

To earth and human life, the Song might dwell

On that delightful time of growing youth,

When craving for the marvellous gives way

To strengthening love for things that we have seen;

When sober truth and steady sympathies,

Offered to notice by less daring pens,

Take firmer hold of us, and words themselves

Move us with conscious pleasure.

﻿I am sad

At thought of raptures now for ever flown;

Almost to tears I sometimes could be sad

To think of, to read over, many a page,

Poems withal of name, which at that time

Did never fail to entrance me, and are now

Dead in my eyes, dead as a theatre

Fresh emptied of spectators. Twice five years

Or less I might have seen, when first my mind

With conscious pleasure opened to the charm

Of words in tuneful order, found them sweet

For their own sakes, a passion, and a power;

And phrases pleased me chosen for delight,

For pomp, or love. Oft, in the public roads

Yet unfrequented, while the morning light

Was yellowing the hill tops, I went abroad

With a dear friend, and for the better part

Of two delightful hours we strolled along

By the still borders of the misty lake,

Repeating favourite verses with one voice,

Or conning more, as happy as the birds

That round us chaunted. Well might we be glad,

Lifted above the ground by airy fancies,

More bright than madness or the dreams of wine;

And, though full oft the objects of our love

Were false, and in their splendour overwrought,

Yet was there surely then no vulgar power

Working within us,—nothing less, in truth,

Than that most noble attribute of man,

Though yet untutored and inordinate,

That wish for something loftier, more adorned,

Than is the common aspect, daily garb,

Of human life. What wonder, then, if sounds

Of exultation echoed through the groves!

For, images, and sentiments, and words,

And everything encountered or pursued

In that delicious world of poesy,

Kept holiday, a never-ending show,

With music, incense, festival, and flowers!



﻿Here must we pause: this only let me add,

From heart-experience, and in humblest sense

Of modesty, that he, who in his youth

A daily wanderer among woods and fields

With living Nature hath been intimate,

Not only in that raw unpractised time

Is stirred to extasy, as others are,

By glittering verse; but further, doth receive,

In measure only dealt out to himself,

Knowledge and increase of enduring joy

From the great Nature that exists in works

Of mighty Poets. Visionary power

Attends the motions of the viewless winds,

Embodied in the mystery of words:

There, darkness makes abode, and all the host

Of shadowy things work endless changes,—there,

As in a mansion like their proper home,

Even forms and substances are circumfused

By that transparent veil with light divine,

And, through the turnings intricate of verse,

Present themselves as objects recognised,

In flashes, and with glory not their own.





BOOK SIXTH.





CAMBRIDGE AND THE ALPS.



The leaves were fading when to Esthwaite's banks

And the simplicities of cottage life

I bade farewell; and, one among the youth

Who, summoned by that season, reunite

As scattered birds troop to the fowler's lure,

Went back to Granta's cloisters, not so prompt

Or eager, though as gay and undepressed

In mind, as when I thence had taken flight

A few short months before. I turned my face

Without repining from the coves and heights

Clothed in the sunshine of the withering fern;

Quitted, not loth, the mild magnificence

Of calmer lakes and louder streams; and you,

Frank-hearted maids of rocky Cumberland,

You and your not unwelcome days of mirth,

Relinquished, and your nights of revelry,

And in my own unlovely cell sate down

In lightsome mood—such privilege has youth

That cannot take long leave of pleasant thoughts.



﻿The bonds of indolent society

Relaxing in their hold, henceforth I lived

More to myself. Two winters may be passed

Without a separate notice: many books

Were skimmed, devoured, or studiously perused,

But with no settled plan. I was detached

Internally from academic cares;

Yet independent study seemed a course

Of hardy disobedience toward friends

And kindred, proud rebellion and unkind.

This spurious virtue, rather let it bear

A name it now deserves, this cowardice,

Gave treacherous sanction to that over-love

Of freedom which encouraged me to turn

From regulations even of my own

As from restraints and bonds. Yet who can tell—

Who knows what thus may have been gained, both then

And at a later season, or preserved;

What love of nature, what original strength

Of contemplation, what intuitive truths,

The deepest and the best, what keen research,

Unbiassed, unbewildered, and unawed?



﻿The Poet's soul was with me at that time;

Sweet meditations, the still overflow

Of present happiness, while future years

Lacked not anticipations, tender dreams,

No few of which have since been realised;

And some remain, hopes for my future life.

Four years and thirty, told this very week,

Have I been now a sojourner on earth,

By sorrow not unsmitten; yet for me

Life's morning radiance hath not left the hills,

Her dew is on the flowers. Those were the days

Which also first emboldened me to trust

With firmness, hitherto but lightly touched

By such a daring thought, that I might leave

Some monument behind me which pure hearts

Should reverence. The instinctive humbleness,

Maintained even by the very name and thought

Of printed books and authorship, began

To melt away; and further, the dread awe

Of mighty names was softened down and seemed

Approachable, admitting fellowship

Of modest sympathy. Such aspect now,

Though not familiarly, my mind put on,

Content to observe, to achieve, and to enjoy.



﻿All winter long, whenever free to choose,

Did I by night frequent the College groves

And tributary walks; the last, and oft

The only one, who had been lingering there

Through hours of silence, till the porter's bell,

A punctual follower on the stroke of nine,

Rang with its blunt unceremonious voice,

Inexorable summons! Lofty elms,

Inviting shades of opportune recess,

Bestowed composure on a neighbourhood

Unpeaceful in itself. A single tree

With sinuous trunk, boughs exquisitely wreathed,

Grew there; an ash which Winter for himself

Decked as in pride, and with outlandish grace:

Up from the ground, and almost to the top,

The trunk and every master branch were green

With clustering ivy, and the lightsome twigs

And outer spray profusely tipped with seeds

That hung in yellow tassels, while the air

Stirred them, not voiceless. Often have I stood

Foot-bound uplooking at this lovely tree

Beneath a frosty moon. The hemisphere

Of magic fiction, verse of mine perchance

May never tread; but scarcely Spenser's self

Could have more tranquil visions in his youth,

Or could more bright appearances create

Of human forms with superhuman powers,

Than I beheld loitering on calm clear nights

Alone, beneath this fairy work of earth.



﻿On the vague reading of a truant youth

'Twere idle to descant. My inner judgment

Not seldom differed from my taste in books,

As if it appertained to another mind,

And yet the books which then I valued most

Are dearest to me now; for, having scanned,

Not heedlessly, the laws, and watched the forms

Of Nature, in that knowledge I possessed

A standard, often usefully applied,

Even when unconsciously, to things removed

From a familiar sympathy.—In fine,

I was a better judge of thoughts than words,

Misled in estimating words, not only

By common inexperience of youth,

But by the trade in classic niceties,

The dangerous craft of culling term and phrase

From languages that want the living voice

To carry meaning to the natural heart;

To tell us what is passion, what is truth,

What reason, what simplicity and sense.



﻿Yet may we not entirely overlook

The pleasure gathered from the rudiments

Of geometric science. Though advanced

In these inquiries, with regret I speak,

No farther than the threshold, there I found

Both elevation and composed delight:

With Indian awe and wonder, ignorance pleased

With its own struggles, did I meditate

On the relation those abstractions bear

To Nature's laws, and by what process led,

Those immaterial agents bowed their heads

Duly to serve the mind of earth-born man;

From star to star, from kindred sphere to sphere,

From system on to system without end.



﻿More frequently from the same source I drew

A pleasure quiet and profound, a sense

Of permanent and universal sway,

And paramount belief; there, recognised

A type, for finite natures, of the one

Supreme Existence, the surpassing life

Which—to the boundaries of space and time,

Of melancholy space and doleful time,

Superior, and incapable of change,

Nor touched by welterings of passion—is,

And hath the name of, God. Transcendent peace

And silence did await upon these thoughts

That were a frequent comfort to my youth.



﻿'Tis told by one whom stormy waters threw,

With fellow-sufferers by the shipwreck spared,

Upon a desert coast, that having brought

To land a single volume, saved by chance,

A treatise of Geometry, he wont,

Although of food and clothing destitute,

And beyond common wretchedness depressed,

To part from company and take this book

(Then first a self-taught pupil in its truths)

To spots remote, and draw his diagrams

With a long staff upon the sand, and thus

Did oft beguile his sorrow, and almost

Forget his feeling: so (if like effect

From the same cause produced, 'mid outward things

So different, may rightly be compared),

So was it then with me, and so will be

With Poets ever. Mighty is the charm

Of those abstractions to a mind beset

With images, and haunted by herself,

And specially delightful unto me

Was that clear synthesis built up aloft

So gracefully; even then when it appeared

Not more than a mere plaything, or a toy

To sense embodied: not the thing it is

In verity, an independent world,

Created out of pure intelligence.



﻿Such dispositions then were mine unearned

By aught, I fear, of genuine desert—

Mine, through heaven's grace and inborn aptitudes.

And not to leave the story of that time

Imperfect, with these habits must be joined,

Moods melancholy, fits of spleen, that loved

A pensive sky, sad days, and piping winds,

The twilight more than dawn, autumn than spring;

A treasured and luxurious gloom of choice

And inclination mainly, and the mere

Redundancy of youth's contentedness.

—To time thus spent, add multitudes of hours

Pilfered away, by what the Bard who sang

Of the Enchanter Indolence hath called

"Good-natured lounging," and behold a map

Of my collegiate life—far less intense

Than duty called for, or, without regard

To duty, might have sprung up of itself

By change of accidents, or even, to speak

Without unkindness, in another place.

Yet why take refuge in that plea?—the fault,

This I repeat, was mine; mine be the blame.



﻿In summer, making quest for works of art,

Or scenes renowned for beauty, I explored

That streamlet whose blue current works its way

Between romantic Dovedale's spiry rocks;

Pried into Yorkshire dales, or hidden tracts

Of my own native region, and was blest

Between these sundry wanderings with a joy

Above all joys, that seemed another morn

Risen on mid noon; blest with the presence, Friend!

Of that sole Sister, her who hath been long

Dear to thee also, thy true friend and mine,

Now, after separation desolate,

Restored to me—such absence that she seemed

A gift then first bestowed. The varied banks

Of Emont, hitherto unnamed in song,

And that monastic castle, 'mid tall trees,

Low-standing by the margin of the stream,

A mansion visited (as fame reports)

By Sidney, where, in sight of our Helvellyn,

Or stormy Cross-fell, snatches he might pen

Of his Arcadia, by fraternal love

Inspired;—that river and those mouldering towers

Have seen us side by side, when, having clomb

The darksome windings of a broken stair,

And crept along a ridge of fractured wall,

Not without trembling, we in safety looked

Forth, through some Gothic window's open space,

And gathered with one mind a rich reward

From the far-stretching landscape, by the light

Of morning beautified, or purple eve;

Or, not less pleased, lay on some turret's head,

Catching from tufts of grass and hare-bell flowers

Their faintest whisper to the passing breeze,

Given out while mid-day heat oppressed the plains.



﻿Another maid there was, who also shed

A gladness o'er that season, then to me,

By her exulting outside look of youth

And placid under-countenance, first endeared;

That other spirit, Coleridge! who is now

So near to us, that meek confiding heart,

So reverenced by us both. O'er paths and fields

In all that neighbourhood, through narrow lanes

Of eglantine, and through the shady woods,

And o'er the Border Beacon, and the waste

Of naked pools, and common crags that lay

Exposed on the bare fell, were scattered love,

The spirit of pleasure, and youth's golden gleam.

O Friend! we had not seen thee at that time,

And yet a power is on me, and a strong

Confusion, and I seem to plant thee there.

Far art thou wandered now in search of health

And milder breezes,—melancholy lot!

But thou art with us, with us in the past,

The present, with us in the times to come.

There is no grief, no sorrow, no despair,

No languor, no dejection, no dismay,

No absence scarcely can there be, for those

Who love as we do. Speed thee well! divide

With us thy pleasure; thy returning strength,

Receive it daily as a joy of ours;

Share with us thy fresh spirits, whether gift

Of gales Etesian or of tender thoughts.



﻿I, too, have been a wanderer; but, alas!

How different the fate of different men.

Though mutually unknown, yea nursed and reared

As if in several elements, we were framed

To bend at last to the same discipline,

Predestined, if two beings ever were,

To seek the same delights, and have one health,

One happiness. Throughout this narrative,

Else sooner ended, I have borne in mind

For whom it registers the birth, and marks the growth,

Of gentleness, simplicity, and truth,

And joyous loves, that hallow innocent days

Of peace and self-command. Of rivers, fields,

And groves I speak to thee, my Friend! to thee,

Who, yet a liveried schoolboy, in the depths

Of the huge city, on the leaded roof

Of that wide edifice, thy school and home,

Wert used to lie and gaze upon the clouds

Moving in heaven; or, of that pleasure tired,

To shut thine eyes, and by internal light

See trees, and meadows, and thy native stream,

Far distant, thus beheld from year to year

Of a long exile. Nor could I forget,

In this late portion of my argument,

That scarcely, as my term of pupilage

Ceased, had I left those academic bowers

When thou wert thither guided. From the heart

Of London, and from cloisters there, thou camest,

And didst sit down in temperance and peace,

A rigorous student. What a stormy course

Then followed. Oh! it is a pang that calls

For utterance, to think what easy change

Of circumstances might to thee have spared

A world of pain, ripened a thousand hopes,

For ever withered. Through this retrospect

Of my collegiate life I still have had

Thy after-sojourn in the self-same place

Present before my eyes, have played with times

And accidents as children do with cards,

Or as a man, who, when his house is built,

A frame locked up in wood and stone, doth still,

As impotent fancy prompts, by his fireside,

Rebuild it to his liking. I have thought

Of thee, thy learning, gorgeous eloquence,

And all the strength and plumage of thy youth,

Thy subtle speculations, toils abstruse

Among the schoolmen, and Platonic forms

Of wild ideal pageantry, shaped out

From things well-matched or ill, and words for things,

The self-created sustenance of a mind

Debarred from Nature's living images,

Compelled to be a life unto herself,

And unrelentingly possessed by thirst

Of greatness, love, and beauty. Not alone,

Ah! surely not in singleness of heart

Should I have seen the light of evening fade

From smooth Cam's silent waters: had we met,

Even at that early time, needs must I trust

In the belief, that my maturer age,

My calmer habits, and more steady voice,

Would with an influence benign have soothed,

Or chased away, the airy wretchedness

That battened on thy youth. But thou hast trod

A march of glory, which doth put to shame

These vain regrets; health suffers in thee, else

Such grief for thee would be the weakest thought

That ever harboured in the breast of man.



﻿A passing word erewhile did lightly touch

On wanderings of my own, that now embraced

With livelier hope a region wider far.



﻿When the third summer freed us from restraint,

A youthful friend, he too a mountaineer,

Not slow to share my wishes, took his staff,

And sallying forth, we journeyed side by side,

Bound to the distant Alps. A hardy slight

Did this unprecedented course imply

Of college studies and their set rewards;

Nor had, in truth, the scheme been formed by me

Without uneasy forethought of the pain,

The censures, and ill-omening of those

To whom my worldly interests were dear.

But Nature then was sovereign in my mind,

And mighty forms, seizing a youthful fancy,

Had given a charter to irregular hopes.

In any age of uneventful calm

Among the nations, surely would my heart

Have been possessed by similar desire;

But Europe at that time was thrilled with joy,

France standing on the top of golden hours,

And human nature seeming born again.



﻿Lightly equipped, and but a few brief looks

Cast on the white cliffs of our native shore

From the receding vessel's deck, we chanced

To land at Calais on the very eve

Of that great federal day; and there we saw,

In a mean city, and among a few,

How bright a face is worn when joy of one

Is joy for tens of millions. Southward thence

We held our way, direct through hamlets, towns,

Gaudy with reliques of that festival,

Flowers left to wither on triumphal arcs,

And window-garlands. On the public roads,

And, once, three days successively, through paths

By which our toilsome journey was abridged,

Among sequestered villages we walked

And found benevolence and blessedness

Spread like a fragrance everywhere, when spring

Hath left no corner of the land untouched:

Where elms for many and many a league in files

With their thin umbrage, on the stately roads

Of that great kingdom, rustled o'er our heads,

For ever near us as we paced along:

How sweet at such a time, with such delight

On every side, in prime of youthful strength,

To feed a Poet's tender melancholy

And fond conceit of sadness, with the sound

Of undulations varying as might please

The wind that swayed them; once, and more than once,

Unhoused beneath the evening star we saw

Dances of liberty, and, in late hours

Of darkness, dances in the open air

Deftly prolonged, though grey-haired lookers on

Might waste their breath in chiding.

﻿Under hills—

The vine-clad hills and slopes of Burgundy,

Upon the bosom of the gentle Saone

We glided forward with the flowing stream.

Swift Rhone! thou wert the wings on which we cut

A winding passage with majestic ease

Between thy lofty rocks. Enchanting show

Those woods and farms and orchards did present,

And single cottages and lurking towns,

Reach after reach, succession without end

Of deep and stately vales! A lonely pair

Of strangers, till day closed, we sailed along,

Clustered together with a merry crowd

Of those emancipated, a blithe host

Of travellers, chiefly delegates returning

From the great spousals newly solemnised

At their chief city, in the sight of Heaven.

Like bees they swarmed, gaudy and gay as bees;

Some vapoured in the unruliness of joy,

And with their swords flourished as if to fight

The saucy air. In this proud company

We landed—took with them our evening meal,

Guests welcome almost as the angels were

To Abraham of old. The supper done,

With flowing cups elate and happy thoughts

We rose at signal given, and formed a ring

And, hand in hand, danced round and round the board;

All hearts were open, every tongue was loud

With amity and glee; we bore a name

Honoured in France, the name of Englishmen,

And hospitably did they give us hail,

As their forerunners in a glorious course;

And round and round the board we danced again.

With these blithe friends our voyage we renewed

At early dawn. The monastery bells

Made a sweet jingling in our youthful ears;

The rapid river flowing without noise,

And each uprising or receding spire

Spake with a sense of peace, at intervals

Touching the heart amid the boisterous crew

By whom we were encompassed. Taking leave

Of this glad throng, foot-travellers side by side,

Measuring our steps in quiet, we pursued

Our journey, and ere twice the sun had set

Beheld the Convent of Chartreuse, and there

Rested within an awful solitude:

Yes, for even then no other than a place

Of soul-affecting solitude appeared

That far-famed region, though our eyes had seen,

As toward the sacred mansion we advanced,

Arms flashing, and a military glare

Of riotous men commissioned to expel

The blameless inmates, and belike subvert

That frame of social being, which so long

Had bodied forth the ghostliness of things

In silence visible and perpetual calm.

—"Stay, stay your sacrilegious hands!"—The voice

Was Nature's, uttered from her Alpine throne;

I heard it then and seem to hear it now—

"Your impious work forbear, perish what may,

Let this one temple last, be this one spot

Of earth devoted to eternity!"

She ceased to speak, but while St. Bruno's pines

Waved their dark tops, not silent as they waved,

And while below, along their several beds,

Murmured the sister streams of Life and Death,

Thus by conflicting passions pressed, my heart

Responded; "Honour to the patriot's zeal!

Glory and hope to new-born Liberty!

Hail to the mighty projects of the time!

Discerning sword that Justice wields, do thou

Go forth and prosper; and, ye purging fires,

Up to the loftiest towers of Pride ascend,

Fanned by the breath of angry Providence.

But oh! if Past and Future be the wings

On whose support harmoniously conjoined

Moves the great spirit of human knowledge, spare

These courts of mystery, where a step advanced

Between the portals of the shadowy rocks

Leaves far behind life's treacherous vanities,

For penitential tears and trembling hopes

Exchanged—to equalise in God's pure sight

Monarch and peasant: be the house redeemed

With its unworldly votaries, for the sake

Of conquest over sense, hourly achieved

Through faith and meditative reason, resting

Upon the word of heaven-imparted truth,

Calmly triumphant; and for humbler claim

Of that imaginative impulse sent

From these majestic floods, yon shining cliffs,

The untransmuted shapes of many worlds,

Cerulean ether's pure inhabitants,

These forests unapproachable by death,

That shall endure as long as man endures,

To think, to hope, to worship, and to feel,

To struggle, to be lost within himself

In trepidation, from the blank abyss

To look with bodily eyes, and be consoled."

Not seldom since that moment have I wished

That thou, O Friend! the trouble or the calm

Hadst shared, when, from profane regards apart,

In sympathetic reverence we trod

The floors of those dim cloisters, till that hour,

From their foundation, strangers to the presence

Of unrestricted and unthinking man.

Abroad, how cheeringly the sunshine lay

Upon the open lawns! Vallombre's groves

Entering, we fed the soul with darkness; thence

Issued, and with uplifted eyes beheld,

In different quarters of the bending sky,

The cross of Jesus stand erect, as if

Hands of angelic powers had fixed it there,

Memorial reverenced by a thousand storms;

Yet then, from the undiscriminating sweep

And rage of one State-whirlwind, insecure.



﻿'Tis not my present purpose to retrace

That variegated journey step by step.

A march it was of military speed,

And Earth did change her images and forms

Before us, fast as clouds are changed in heaven.

Day after day, up early and down late,

From hill to vale we dropped, from vale to hill

Mounted—from province on to province swept,

Keen hunters in a chase of fourteen weeks,

Eager as birds of prey, or as a ship

Upon the stretch, when winds are blowing fair:

Sweet coverts did we cross of pastoral life,

Enticing valleys, greeted them and left

Too soon, while yet the very flash and gleam

Of salutation were not passed away.

Oh! sorrow for the youth who could have seen

Unchastened, unsubdued, unawed, unraised

To patriarchal dignity of mind,

And pure simplicity of wish and will,

Those sanctified abodes of peaceful man,

Pleased (though to hardship born, and compassed round

With danger, varying as the seasons change),

Pleased with his daily task, or, if not pleased,

Contented, from the moment that the dawn

(Ah! surely not without attendant gleams

Of soul-illumination) calls him forth

To industry, by glistenings flung on rocks,

Whose evening shadows lead him to repose.



﻿Well might a stranger look with bounding heart

Down on a green recess, the first I saw

Of those deep haunts, an aboriginal vale,

Quiet and lorded over and possessed

By naked huts, wood-built, and sown like tents

Or Indian cabins over the fresh lawns

And by the river side.

﻿That very day,

From a bare ridge we also first beheld

Unveiled the summit of Mont Blanc, and grieved

To have a soulless image on the eye

That had usurped upon a living thought

That never more could be. The wondrous Vale

Of Chamouny stretched far below, and soon

With its dumb cataracts and streams of ice,

A motionless array of mighty waves,

Five rivers broad and vast, made rich amends,

And reconciled us to realities;

There small birds warble from the leafy trees,

The eagle soars high in the element,

There doth the reaper bind the yellow sheaf,

The maiden spread the haycock in the sun,

While Winter like a well-tamed lion walks,

Descending from the mountain to make sport

Among the cottages by beds of flowers.



﻿Whate'er in this wide circuit we beheld,

Or heard, was fitted to our unripe state

Of intellect and heart. With such a book

Before our eyes, we could not choose but read

Lessons of genuine brotherhood, the plain

And universal reason of mankind,

The truths of young and old. Nor, side by side

Pacing, two social pilgrims, or alone

Each with his humour, could we fail to abound

In dreams and fictions, pensively composed:

Dejection taken up for pleasure's sake,

And gilded sympathies, the willow wreath,

And sober posies of funereal flowers,

Gathered among those solitudes sublime

From formal gardens of the lady Sorrow,

Did sweeten many a meditative hour.



﻿Yet still in me with those soft luxuries

Mixed something of stern mood, an under-thirst

Of vigour seldom utterly allayed.

And from that source how different a sadness

Would issue, let one incident make known.

When from the Vallais we had turned, and clomb

Along the Simplon's steep and rugged road,

Following a band of muleteers, we reached

A halting-place, where all together took

Their noon-tide meal. Hastily rose our guide,

Leaving us at the board; awhile we lingered,

Then paced the beaten downward way that led

Right to a rough stream's edge, and there broke off;

The only track now visible was one

That from the torrent's further brink held forth

Conspicuous invitation to ascend

A lofty mountain. After brief delay

Crossing the unbridged stream, that road we took,

And clomb with eagerness, till anxious fears

Intruded, for we failed to overtake

Our comrades gone before. By fortunate chance,

While every moment added doubt to doubt,

A peasant met us, from whose mouth we learned

That to the spot which had perplexed us first

We must descend, and there should find the road,

Which in the stony channel of the stream

Lay a few steps, and then along its banks;

And, that our future course, all plain to sight,

Was downwards, with the current of that stream.

Loth to believe what we so grieved to hear,

For still we had hopes that pointed to the clouds,

We questioned him again, and yet again;

But every word that from the peasant's lips

Came in reply, translated by our feelings,

Ended in this,—that we had crossed the Alps.



﻿Imagination—here the Power so called

Through sad incompetence of human speech,

That awful Power rose from the mind's abyss

Like an unfathered vapour that enwraps,

At once, some lonely traveller. I was lost;

Halted without an effort to break through;

But to my conscious soul I now can say—

"I recognise thy glory:" in such strength

Of usurpation, when the light of sense

Goes out, but with a flash that has revealed

The invisible world, doth greatness make abode,

There harbours; whether we be young or old,

Our destiny, our being's heart and home,

Is with infinitude, and only there;

With hope it is, hope that can never die,

Effort, and expectation, and desire,

And something evermore about to be.

Under such banners militant, the soul

Seeks for no trophies, struggles for no spoils

That may attest her prowess, blest in thoughts

That are their own perfection and reward,

Strong in herself and in beatitude

That hides her, like the mighty flood of Nile

Poured from his fount of Abyssinian clouds

To fertilise the whole Egyptian plain.



﻿The melancholy slackening that ensued

Upon those tidings by the peasant given

Was soon dislodged. Downwards we hurried fast,

And, with the half-shaped road which we had missed,

Entered a narrow chasm. (6)The brook and road

Were fellow-travellers in this gloomy strait,

And with them did we journey several hours

At a slow pace. The immeasurable height

Of woods decaying, never to be decayed,

The stationary blasts of waterfalls,

And in the narrow rent at every turn

Winds thwarting winds, bewildered and forlorn,

The torrents shooting from the clear blue sky,

The rocks that muttered close upon our ears,

Black drizzling crags that spake by the way-side

As if a voice were in them, the sick sight

And giddy prospect of the raving stream,

The unfettered clouds and region of the Heavens,

Tumult and peace, the darkness and the light—

Were all like workings of one mind, the features

Of the same face, blossoms upon one tree;

Characters of the great Apocalypse,

The types and symbols of Eternity,

Of first, and last, and midst, and without end.



﻿That night our lodging was a house that stood

Alone within the valley, at a point

Where, tumbling from aloft, a torrent swelled

The rapid stream whose margin we had trod;

A dreary mansion, large beyond all need,

With high and spacious rooms, deafened and stunned

By noise of waters, making innocent sleep

Lie melancholy among weary bones.



﻿Uprisen betimes, our journey we renewed,

Led by the stream, ere noon-day magnified

Into a lordly river, broad and deep,

Dimpling along in silent majesty,

With mountains for its neighbours, and in view

Of distant mountains and their snowy tops,

And thus proceeding to Locarno's Lake,

Fit resting-place for such a visitant.

Locarno! spreading out in width like Heaven,

How dost thou cleave to the poetic heart,

Bask in the sunshine of the memory;

And Como! thou, a treasure whom the earth

Keeps to herself, confined as in a depth

Of Abyssinian privacy. I spake

Of thee, thy chestnut woods, and garden plots

Of Indian corn tended by dark-eyed maids;

Thy lofty steeps, and pathways roofed with vines,

Winding from house to house, from town to town,

Sole link that binds them to each other; walks,

League after league, and cloistral avenues,

Where silence dwells if music be not there:

While yet a youth undisciplined in verse,

Through fond ambition of that hour, I strove

To chant your praise; nor can approach you now

Ungreeted by a more melodious Song,

Where tones of Nature smoothed by learned Art

May flow in lasting current. Like a breeze

Or sunbeam over your domain I passed

In motion without pause; but ye have left

Your beauty with me, a serene accord

Of forms and colours, passive, yet endowed

In their submissiveness with power as sweet

And gracious, almost might I dare to say,

As virtue is, or goodness; sweet as love,

Or the remembrance of a generous deed,

Or mildest visitations of pure thought,

When God, the giver of all joy, is thanked

Religiously, in silent blessedness;

Sweet as this last herself, for such it is.



﻿With those delightful pathways we advanced,

For two days' space, in presence of the Lake,

That, stretching far among the Alps, assumed

A character more stern. The second night,

From sleep awakened, and misled by sound

Of the church clock telling the hours with strokes

Whose import then we had not learned, we rose

By moonlight, doubting not that day was nigh,

And that meanwhile, by no uncertain path,

Along the winding margin of the lake,

Led, as before, we should behold the scene

Hushed in profound repose. We left the town

Of Gravedona with this hope; but soon

Were lost, bewildered among woods immense,

And on a rock sate down, to wait for day.

An open place it was, and overlooked,

From high, the sullen water far beneath,

On which a dull red image of the moon

Lay bedded, changing oftentimes its form

Like an uneasy snake. From hour to hour

We sate and sate, wondering, as if the night

Had been ensnared by witchcraft. On the rock

At last we stretched our weary limbs for sleep,

But could not sleep, tormented by the stings

Of insects, which, with noise like that of noon,

Filled all the woods; the cry of unknown birds;

The mountains more by blackness visible

And their own size, than any outward light;

The breathless wilderness of clouds; the clock

That told, with unintelligible voice,

The widely parted hours; the noise of streams,

And sometimes rustling motions nigh at hand,

That did not leave us free from personal fear;

And, lastly, the withdrawing moon, that set

Before us, while she still was high in heaven;—

These were our food; and such a summer's night

Followed that pair of golden days that shed

On Como's Lake, and all that round it lay,

Their fairest, softest, happiest influence.



﻿But here I must break off, and bid farewell

To days, each offering some new sight, or fraught

With some untried adventure, in a course

Prolonged till sprinklings of autumnal snow

Checked our unwearied steps. Let this alone

Be mentioned as a parting word, that not

In hollow exultation, dealing out

Hyperboles of praise comparative;

Not rich one moment to be poor for ever;

Not prostrate, overborne, as if the mind

Herself were nothing, a mere pensioner

On outward forms—did we in presence stand

Of that magnificent region. On the front

Of this whole Song is 'written that my heart

Must, in such Temple, needs have offered up

A different worship. Finally, whate'er

I saw, or heard, or felt, was but a stream

That flowed into a kindred stream; a gale,

Confederate with the current of the soul,

To speed my voyage; every sound or sight,

In its degree of power, administered

To grandeur or to tenderness,—to the one

Directly, but to tender thoughts by means

Less often instantaneous in effect;

Led me to these by paths that, in the main,

Were more circuitous, but not less sure

Duly to reach the point marked out by Heaven.



﻿Oh, most belovèd Friend! a glorious time,

A happy time that was; triumphant looks

Were then the common language of all eyes;

As if awaked from sleep, the Nations hailed

Their great expectancy: the fife of war

Was then a spirit-stirring sound indeed,

A black-bird's whistle in a budding grove.

We left the Swiss exulting in the fate

Of their near neighbours; and, when shortening fast

Our pilgrimage, nor distant far from home,

We crossed the Brabant armies on the fret

For battle in the cause of Liberty.

A stripling, scarcely of the household then

Of social life, I looked upon these things

As from a distance; heard, and saw, and felt,

Was touched, but with no intimate concern;

I seemed to move along them, as a bird

Moves through the air, or as a fish pursues

Its sport, or feeds in its proper element;

I wanted not that joy, I did not need

Such help; the ever-living universe,

Turn where I might, was opening out its glories,

And the independent spirit of pure youth

Called forth, at every season, new delights

Spread round my steps like sunshine o'er green fields.





BOOK SEVENTH.





RESIDENCE IN LONDON.



Six changeful years have vanished since I first

Poured out (saluted by that quickening breeze

Which met me issuing from the City's (7) walls)

A glad preamble to this Verse: I sang

Aloud, with fervour irresistible

Of short-lived transport, like a torrent bursting,

From a black thunder-cloud, down Scafell's side

To rush and disappear. But soon broke forth

(So willed the Muse) a less impetuous stream,

That flowed awhile with unabating strength,

Then stopped for years; not audible again

Before last primrose-time. Belovèd Friend!

The assurance which then cheered some heavy thoughts

On thy departure to a foreign land

Has failed; too slowly moves the promised work.

Through the whole summer have I been at rest,

Partly from voluntary holiday,

And part through outward hindrance. But I heard,

After the hour of sunset yester-even,

Sitting within doors between light and dark,

A choir of redbreasts gathered somewhere near

My threshold,—minstrels from the distant woods

Sent in on Winter's service, to announce,

With preparation artful and benign,

That the rough lord had left the surly North

On his accustomed journey. The delight,

Due to this timely notice, unawares

Smote me, and, listening, I in whispers said,

"Ye heartsome Choristers, ye and I will be

Associates, and, unscared by blustering winds,

Will chant together." Thereafter, as the shades

Of twilight deepened, going forth, I spied

A glow-worm underneath a dusky plume

Or canopy of yet unwithered fern,

Clear-shining, like a hermit's taper seen

Through a thick forest. Silence touched me here

No less than sound had done before; the child

Of Summer, lingering, shining, by herself,

The voiceless worm on the unfrequented hills,

Seemed sent on the same errand with the choir

Of Winter that had warbled at my door,

And the whole year breathed tenderness and love.



﻿The last night's genial feeling overflowed

Upon this morning, and my favourite grove,

Tossing in sunshine its dark boughs aloft,

As if to make the strong wind visible,

Wakes in me agitations like its own,

A spirit friendly to the Poet's task,

Which we will now resume with lively hope,

Nor checked by aught of tamer argument

That lies before us, needful to be told.



﻿Returned from that excursion,(8) soon I bade

Farewell for ever to the sheltered seats

Of gownèd students, quitted hall and bower,

And every comfort of that privileged ground,

Well pleased to pitch a vagrant tent among

The unfenced regions of society.



﻿Yet, undetermined to what course of life

I should adhere, and seeming to possess

A little space of intermediate time

At full command, to London first I turned,

In no disturbance of excessive hope,

By personal ambition unenslaved,

Frugal as there was need, and, though self-willed,

From dangerous passions free. Three years had flown

Since I had felt in heart and soul the shock

Of the huge town's first presence, and had paced

Her endless streets, a transient visitant:

Now, fixed amid that concourse of mankind

Where Pleasure whirls about incessantly,

And life and labour seem but one, I filled

An idler's place; an idler well content

To have a house (what matter for a home?)

That owned him; living cheerfully abroad

With unchecked fancy ever on the stir,

And all my young affections out of doors.



﻿There was a time when whatsoe'er is feigned

Of airy palaces, and gardens built

By Genii of romance; or hath in grave

Authentic history been set forth of Rome,

Alcairo, Babylon, or Persepolis;

Or given upon report by pilgrim friars,

Of golden cities ten months' journey deep

Among Tartarian wilds—fell short, far short,

Of what my fond simplicity believed

And thought of London—held me by a chain

Less strong of wonder and obscure delight.

Whether the bolt of childhood's Fancy shot

For me beyond its ordinary mark,

'Twere vain to ask; but in our flock of boys

Was One, a cripple from his birth, whom chance

Summoned from school to London; fortunate

And envied traveller! When the Boy returned,

After short absence, curiously I scanned

His mien and person, nor was free, in sooth,

From disappointment, not to find some change

In look and air, from that new region brought,

As if from Fairy-land. Much I questioned him;

And every word he uttered, on my ears

Fell flatter than a cagèd parrot's note,

That answers unexpectedly awry,

And mocks the prompter's listening. Marvellous things

Had vanity (quick Spirit that appears

Almost as deeply seated and as strong

In a Child's heart as fear itself) conceived

For my enjoyment. Would that I could now

Recal what then I pictured to myself,

Of mitred Prelates, Lords in ermine clad,

The King, and the King's Palace, and, not last,

Nor least, Heaven bless him! the renowned Lord Mayor:

Dreams not unlike to those which once begat

A change of purpose in young Whittington,

When he, a friendless and a drooping boy,

Sate on a stone, and heard the bells speak out

Articulate music. Above all, one thought

Baffled my understanding: how men lived

Even next-door neighbours, as we say, yet still

Strangers, not knowing each the other's name.



﻿O, wond'rous power of words, by simple faith

Licensed to take the meaning that we love!

Vauxhall and Ranelagh! I then had heard

Of your green groves, and wilderness of lamps

Dimming the stars, and fireworks magical,

And gorgeous ladies, under splendid domes,

Floating in dance, or warbling high in air

The songs of spirits! Nor had Fancy fed

With less delight upon that other class

Of marvels, broad-day wonders permanent:

The River proudly bridged; the dizzy top

And Whispering Gallery of St. Paul's; the tombs

Of Westminster; the Giants of Guildhall;

Bedlam, and those carved maniacs at the gates,

Perpetually recumbent; Statues—man,

And the horse under him—in gilded pomp

Adorning flowery gardens, 'mid vast squares;

The Monument, and that Chamber of the Tower

Where England's sovereigns sit in long array,

Their steeds bestriding,—every mimic shape

Cased in the gleaming mail the monarch wore,

Whether for gorgeous tournament addressed,

Or life or death upon the battle-field.

Those bold imaginations in due time

Had vanished, leaving others in their stead:

And now I looked upon the living scene;

Familiarly perused it; oftentimes,

In spite of strongest disappointment, pleased

Through courteous self-submission, as a tax

Paid to the object by prescriptive right.



﻿Rise up, thou monstrous ant-hill on the plain

Of a too busy world! Before me flow,

Thou endless stream of men and moving things!

Thy every-day appearance, as it strikes—

With wonder heightened, or sublimed by awe—

On strangers, of all ages; the quick dance

Of colours, lights, and forms; the deafening din;

The comers and the goers face to face,

Face after face; the string of dazzling wares,

Shop after shop, with symbols, blazoned names,

And all the tradesman's honours overhead:

Here, fronts of houses, like a title-page,

With letters huge inscribed from top to toe,

Stationed above the door, like guardian saints;

There, allegoric shapes, female or male,

Or physiognomies of real men,

Land-warriors, kings, or admirals of the sea,

Boyle, Shakspeare, Newton, or the attractive head

Of some quack-doctor, famous in his day.



﻿Meanwhile the roar continues, till at length,

Escaped as from an enemy, we turn

Abruptly into some sequestered nook,

Still as a sheltered place when winds blow loud!

At leisure, thence, through tracts of thin resort,

And sights and sounds that come at intervals,

We take our way. A raree-show is here,

With children gathered round; another street

Presents a company of dancing dogs,

Or dromedary, with an antic pair

Of monkeys on his back; a minstrel band

Of Savoyards; or, single and alone,

An English ballad-singer. Private courts,

Gloomy as coffins, and unsightly lanes

Thrilled by some female vendor's scream, belike

The very shrillest of all London cries,

May then entangle our impatient steps;

Conducted through those labyrinths, unawares,

To privileged regions and inviolate,

Where from their airy lodges studious lawyers

Look out on waters, walks, and gardens green.



﻿Thence back into the throng, until we reach,

Following the tide that slackens by degrees,

Some half-frequented scene, where wider streets

Bring straggling breezes of suburban air.

Here files of ballads dangle from dead walls;

Advertisements, of giant-size, from high

Press forward, in all colours, on the sight;

These, bold in conscious merit, lower down;

That, fronted with a most imposing word,

Is, peradventure, one in masquerade.

As on the broadening causeway we advance,

Behold, turned upwards, a face hard and strong

In lineaments, and red with over-toil.

'Tis one encountered here and everywhere;

A travelling cripple, by the trunk cut short,

And stumping on his arms. In sailor's garb

Another lies at length, beside a range

Of well-formed characters, with chalk inscribed

Upon the smooth flat stones: the Nurse is here,

The Bachelor, that loves to sun himself,

The military Idler, and the Dame,

That field-ward takes her walk with decent steps.



﻿Now homeward through the thickening hubbub, where

See, among less distinguishable shapes,

The begging scavenger, with hat in hand;

The Italian, as he thrids his way with care,

Steadying, far-seen, a frame of images

Upon his head; with basket at his breast

The Jew; the stately and slow-moving Turk,

With freight of slippers piled beneath his arm!



﻿Enough;—the mighty concourse I surveyed

With no unthinking mind, well pleased to note

Among the crowd all specimens of man,

Through all the colours which the sun bestows,

And every character of form and face:

The Swede, the Russian; from the genial south,

The Frenchman and the Spaniard; from remote

America, the Hunter-Indian; Moors,

Malays, Lascars, the Tartar, the Chinese,

And Negro Ladies in white muslin gowns.



﻿At leisure, then, I viewed, from day to day,

The spectacles within doors,—birds and beasts

Of every nature, and strange plants convened

From every clime; and, next, those sights that ape

The absolute presence of reality,

Expressing, as in mirror, sea and land,

And what earth is, and what she has to shew.

I do not here allude to subtlest craft,

By means refined attaining purest ends,

But imitations, fondly made in plain

Confession of man's weakness and his loves.

Whether the Painter, whose ambitious skill

Submits to nothing less than taking in

A whole horizon's circuit, do with power,

Like that of angels or commissioned spirits,

Fix us upon some lofty pinnacle,

Or in a ship on waters, with a world

Of life, and life-like mockery beneath,

Above, behind, far stretching and before;

Or more mechanic artist represent

By scale exact, in model, wood or clay,

From blended colours also borrowing help,

Some miniature of famous spots or things,—

St. Peter's Church; or, more aspiring aim,

In microscopic vision, Rome herself;

Or, haply, some choice rural haunt,—the Falls

Of Tivoli; and, high upon that steep,

The Sibyl's mouldering Temple! every tree,

Villa, or cottage, lurking among rocks

Throughout the landscape; tuft, stone scratch minute—

All that the traveller sees when he is there.



﻿And to these exhibitions, mute and still,

Others of wider scope, where living men,

Music, and shifting pantomimic scenes,

Diversified the allurement. Need I fear

To mention by its name, as in degree,

Lowest of these and humblest in attempt,

Yet richly graced with honours of her own,

Half-rural Sadler's Wells? Though at that time

Intolerant, as is the way of youth

Unless itself be pleased, here more than once

Taking my seat, I saw (nor blush to add,

With ample recompense) giants and dwarfs,

Clowns, conjurors, posture-masters, harlequins,

Amid the uproar of the rabblement,

Perform their feats. Nor was it mean delight

To watch crude Nature work in untaught minds;

To note the laws and progress of belief;

Though obstinate on this way, yet on that

How willingly we travel, and how far!

To have, for instance, brought upon the scene

The champion, Jack the Giant-killer: Lo!

He dons his coat of darkness; on the stage

Walks, and achieves his wonders, from the eye

Of living Mortal covert, "as the moon

Hid in her vacant interlunar cave."

Delusion bold! and how can it be wrought?

The garb he wears is black as death, the word

"Invisible" flames forth upon his chest.



﻿Here, too, were "forms and pressures of the time,"

Rough, bold, as Grecian comedy displayed

When Art was young; dramas of living men,

And recent things yet warm with life; a sea-fight,

Shipwreck, or some domestic incident

Divulged by Truth and magnified by Fame,

Such as the daring brotherhood of late

Set forth, too serious theme for that light place—

I mean, O distant Friend! a story drawn

From our own ground,—the Maid of Buttermere,—

And how, unfaithful to a virtuous wife

Deserted and deceived, the spoiler came

And wooed the artless daughter of the hills,

And wedded her, in cruel mockery

Of love and marriage bonds. These words to thee

Must needs bring back the moment when we first,

Ere the broad world rang with the maiden's name,

Beheld her serving at the cottage inn,

Both stricken, as she entered or withdrew,

With admiration of her modest mien

And carriage, marked by unexampled grace.

We since that time not unfamiliarly

Have seen her,—her discretion have observed,

Her just opinions, delicate reserve,

Her patience, and humility of mind

Unspoiled by commendation and the excess

Of public notice—an offensive light

To a meek spirit suffering inwardly.



﻿From this memorial tribute to my theme

I was returning, when, with sundry forms

Commingled—shapes which met me in the way

That we must tread—thy image rose again,

Maiden of Buttermere! She lives in peace

Upon the spot where she was born and reared;

Without contamination doth she live

In quietness, without anxiety:

Beside the mountain chapel, sleeps in earth

Her new-born infant, fearless as a lamb

That, thither driven from some unsheltered place,

Rests underneath the little rock-like pile

When storms are raging. Happy are they both—

Mother and child!—These feelings, in themselves

Trite, do yet scarcely seem so when I think

On those ingenuous moments of our youth

Ere we have learnt by use to slight the crimes

And sorrows of the world. Those simple days

Are now my theme; and, foremost of the scenes,

Which yet survive in memory, appears

One, at whose centre sate a lovely Boy,

A sportive infant, who, for six months' space,

Not more, had been of age to deal about

Articulate prattle—Child as beautiful

As ever clung around a mother's neck,

Or father fondly gazed upon with pride.

There, too, conspicuous for stature tall

And large dark eyes, beside her infant stood

The mother; but, upon her cheeks diffused,

False tints too well accorded with the glare

From play-house lustres thrown without reserve

On every object near. The Boy had been

The pride and pleasure of all lookers-on

In whatsoever place, but seemed in this

A sort of alien scattered from the clouds.

Of lusty vigour, more than infantine

He was in limb, in cheek a summer rose

Just three parts blown—a cottage-child—if e'er,

By cottage-door on breezy mountain side,

Or in some sheltering vale, was seen a babe

By Nature's gifts so favoured. Upon a board

Decked with refreshments had this child been placed,

His little stage in the vast theatre,

And there he sate surrounded with a throng

Of chance spectators, chiefly dissolute men

And shameless women, treated and caressed;

Ate, drank, and with the fruit and glasses played,

While oaths and laughter and indecent speech

Were rife about him as the songs of birds

Contending after showers. The mother now

Is fading out of memory, but I see

The lovely Boy as I beheld him then

Among the wretched and the falsely gay,

Like one of those who walked with hair unsinged

Amid the fiery furnace. Charms and spells

Muttered on black and spiteful instigation

Have stopped, as some believe, the kindliest growths.

Ah, with how different spirit might a prayer

Have been preferred, that this fair creature, checked

By special privilege of Nature's love,

Should in his childhood be detained for ever!

But with its universal freight the tide

Hath rolled along, and this bright innocent,

Mary! may now have lived till he could look

With envy on thy nameless babe that sleeps,

Beside the mountain chapel, undisturbed.



﻿Four rapid years had scarcely then been told

Since, travelling southward from our pastoral hills,

I heard, and for the first time in my life,

The voice of woman utter blasphemy—

Saw woman as she is, to open shame

Abandoned, and the pride of public vice;

I shuddered, for a barrier seemed at once

Thrown in, that from humanity divorced

Humanity, splitting the race of man

In twain, yet leaving the same outward form.

Distress of mind ensued upon the sight

And ardent meditation. Later years

Brought to such spectacle a milder sadness,

Feelings of pure commiseration, grief

For the individual and the overthrow

Of her soul's beauty; farther I was then

But seldom led, or wished to go; in truth

The sorrow of the passion stopped me there.



﻿But let me now, less moved, in order take

Our argument. Enough is said to show

How casual incidents of real life,

Observed where pastime only had been sought,

Outweighed, or put to flight, the set events

And measured passions of the stage, albeit

By Siddons trod in the fulness of her power.

Yet was the theatre my dear delight;

The very gilding, lamps and painted scrolls,

And all the mean upholstery of the place,

Wanted not animation, when the tide

Of pleasure ebbed but to return as fast

With the ever-shifting figures of the scene,

Solemn or gay: whether some beauteous dame

Advanced in radiance through a deep recess

Of thick entangled forest, like the moon

Opening the clouds; or sovereign king, announced

With flourishing trumpet, came in full-blown state

Of the world's greatness, winding round with train

Of courtiers, banners, and a length of guards;

Or captive led in abject weeds, and jingling

His slender manacles; or romping girl

Bounced, leapt, and pawed the air; or mumbling sire,

A scare-crow pattern of old age dressed up

In all the tatters of infirmity

All loosely put together, hobbled in,

Stumping upon a cane with which he smites,

From time to time, the solid boards, and makes them

Prate somewhat loudly of the whereabout

Of one so overloaded with his years.

But what of this! the laugh, the grin, grimace,

The antics striving to outstrip each other,

Were all received, the least of them not lost,

With an unmeasured welcome. Through the night,

Between the show, and many-headed mass

Of the spectators, and each several nook

Filled with its fray or brawl, how eagerly

And with what flashes, as it were, the mind

Turned this way—that way! sportive and alert

And watchful, as a kitten when at play,

While winds are eddying round her, among straws

And rustling leaves. Enchanting age and sweet!

Romantic almost, looked at through a space,

How small, of intervening years! For then,

Though surely no mean progress had been made

In meditations holy and sublime,

Yet something of a girlish child-like gloss

Of novelty survived for scenes like these;

Enjoyment haply handed down from times

When at a country-playhouse, some rude barn

Tricked out for that proud use, if I perchance

Caught, on a summer evening through a chink

In the old wall, an unexpected glimpse

Of daylight, the bare thought of where I was

Gladdened me more than if I had been led

Into a dazzling cavern of romance,

Crowded with Genii busy among works

Not to be looked at by the common sun.



﻿The matter that detains us now may seem,

To many, neither dignified enough

Nor arduous, yet will not be scorned by them,

Who, looking inward, have observed the ties

That bind the perishable hours of life

Each to the other, and the curious props

By which the world of memory and thought

Exists and is sustained. More lofty themes,

Such as at least do wear a prouder face,

Solicit our regard; but when I think

Of these, I feel the imaginative power

Languish within me; even then it slept,

When, pressed by tragic sufferings, the heart

Was more than full; amid my sobs and tears

It slept, even in the pregnant season of youth.

For though I was most passionately moved

And yielded to all changes of the scene

With an obsequious promptness, yet the storm

Passed not beyond the suburbs of the mind;

Save when realities of act and mien,

The incarnation of the spirits that move

In harmony amid the Poet's world,

Rose to ideal grandeur, or, called forth

By power of contrast, made me recognise,

As at a glance, the things which I had shaped,

And yet not shaped, had seen and scarcely seen,

When, having closed the mighty Shakspeare's page,

I mused, and thought, and felt, in solitude.



﻿Pass we from entertainments, that are such

Professedly, to others titled higher,

Yet, in the estimate of youth at least,

More near akin to those than names imply,—

I mean the brawls of lawyers in their courts

Before the ermined judge, or that great stage

Where senators, tongue-favoured men, perform,

Admired and envied. Oh! the beating heart,

When one among the prime of these rose up,—

One, of whose name from childhood we had heard

Familiarly, a household term, like those,

The Bedfords, Glosters, Salsburys, of old

Whom the fifth Harry talks of. Silence! hush!

This is no trifler, no short -flighted wit,

No stammerer of a minute, painfully

Delivered. No! the Orator hath yoked

The Hours, like young Aurora, to his car:

Thrice welcome Presence! how can patience e'er

Grow weary of attending on a track

That kindles with such glory! All are charmed,

Astonished; like a hero in romance,

He winds away his never-ending horn;

Words follow words, sense seems to follow sense:

What memory and what logic! till the strain

Transcendent, superhuman as it seemed,

Grows tedious even in a young man's ear.



﻿Genius of Burke! forgive the pen seduced

By specious wonders, and too slow to tell

Of what the ingenuous, what bewildered men,

Beginning to mistrust their boastful guides,

And wise men, willing to grow wiser, caught,

Rapt auditors! from thy most eloquent tongue—

Now mute, for ever mute in the cold grave.

I see him,—old, but vigorous in age,—

Stand like an oak whose stag-horn branches start

Out of its leafy brow, the more to awe

The younger brethren of the grove. But some—

While he forewarns, denounces, launches forth,

Against all systems built on abstract rights,

Keen ridicule; the majesty proclaims

Of Institutes and Laws, hallowed by time;

Declares the vital power of social ties

Endeared by Custom; and with high disdain,

Exploding upstart Theory, insists

Upon the allegiance to which men are born—

Some—say at once a froward multitude—

Murmur (for truth is hated, where not loved)

As the winds fret within the Æolian cave,

Galled by their monarch's chain. The times were big

With ominous change, which, night by night, provoked

Keen struggles, and black clouds of passion raised;

But memorable moments intervened,

When Wisdom, like the Goddess from Jove's brain,

Broke forth in armour of resplendent words,

Startling the Synod. Could a youth, and one

In ancient story versed, whose breast had heaved

Under the weight of classic eloquence,

Sit, see, and hear, unthankful, uninspired?



﻿Nor did the Pulpit's oratory fail

To achieve its higher triumph. Not unfelt

Were its admonishments, nor lightly heard

The awful truths delivered thence by tongues

Endowed with various power to search the soul;

Yet ostentation, domineering, oft

Poured forth harangues, how sadly out of place!—

There have I seen a comely bachelor,

Fresh from a toilette of two hours, ascend

His rostrum, with seraphic glance look up,

And, in a tone elaborately low

Beginning, lead his voice through many a maze

A minuet course; and, winding up his mouth,

From time to time, into an orifice

Most delicate, a lurking eyelet, small,

And only not invisible, again

Open it out, diffusing thence a smile

Of rapt irradiation, exquisite.

Meanwhile the Evangelists, Isaiah, Job,

Moses, and he who penned, the other day,

The Death of Abel, Shakspeare, and the Bard

Whose genius spangled o'er a gloomy theme

With fancies thick as his inspiring stars,

And Ossian (doubt not, 'tis the naked truth)

Summoned from streamy Morven—each and all

Would, in their turns, lend ornaments and flowers

To entwine the crook of eloquence that helped

This pretty Shepherd, pride of all the plains,

To rule and guide his captivated flock.



﻿I glance but at a few conspicuous marks,

Leaving a thousand others, that, in hall,

Court, theatre, conventicle, or shop,

In public room or private, park or street,

Each fondly reared on his own pedestal,

Looked out for admiration. Folly, vice,

Extravagance in gesture, mien, and dress,

And all the strife of singularity,

Lies to the ear, and lies to every sense—

Of these, and of the living shapes they wear,

There is no end. Such candidates for regard,

Although well pleased to be where they were found,

I did not hunt after, nor greatly prize,

Nor made unto myself a secret boast

Of reading them with quick and curious eye;

But, as a common produce, things that are

To-day, to-morrow will be, took of them

Such willing note, as, on some errand bound

That asks not speed, a Traveller might bestow

On sea-shells that bestrew the sandy beach,

Or daisies swarming through the fields of June.



﻿But foolishness and madness in parade,

Though most at home in this their dear domain,

Are scattered everywhere, no rarities,

Even to the rudest novice of the Schools.

Me, rather, it employed, to note, and keep

In memory, those individual sights

Of courage, or integrity, or truth,

Or tenderness, which there, set off by foil,

Appeared more touching. One will I select;

A Father—for he bore that sacred name—

Him saw I, sitting in an open square,

Upon a corner-stone of that low wall,

Wherein were fixed the iron pales that fenced

A spacious grass-plot; there, in silence, sate

This One Man, with a sickly babe outstretched

Upon his knee, whom he had thither brought

For sunshine, and to breathe the fresher air.

Of those who passed, and me who looked at him,

He took no heed; but in his brawny arms

(The Artificer was to the elbow bare,

And from his work this moment had been stolen)

He held the child, and, bending over it,

As if he were afraid both of the sun

And of the air, which he had come to seek,

Eyed the poor babe with love unutterable.



﻿As the black storm upon the mountain top

Sets off the sunbeam in the valley, so

That huge fermenting mass of human-kind

Serves as a solemn back-ground, or relief,

To single forms and objects, whence they draw,

For feeling and contemplative regard,

More than inherent liveliness and power.

How oft, amid those overflowing streets,

Have I gone forward with the crowd, and said

Unto myself, "The face of every one

That passes by me is a mystery!"

Thus have I looked, nor ceased to look, oppressed

By thoughts of what and whither, when and how,

Until the shapes before my eyes became

A second-sight procession, such as glides

Over still mountains, or appears in dreams;

And once, far-travelled in such mood, beyond

The reach of common indication, lost

Amid the moving pageant, I was smitten

Abruptly, with the view (a sight not rare)

Of a blind Beggar, who, with upright face,

Stood, propped against a wall, upon his chest

Wearing a written paper, to explain

His story, whence he came, and who he was.

Caught by the spectacle my mind turned round

As with the might of waters; an apt type

This label seemed of the utmost we can know,

Both of ourselves and of the universe;

And, on the shape of that unmoving man,

His steadfast face and sightless eyes, I gazed,

As if admonished from another world.



﻿Though reared upon the base of outward things,

Structures like these the excited spirit mainly

Builds for herself; scenes different there are,

Full-formed, that take, with small internal help,

Possession of the faculties,—the peace

That comes with night; the deep solemnity

Of nature's intermediate hours of rest,

When the great tide of human life stands still;

The business of the day to come, unborn,

Of that gone by, locked up, as in the grave;

The blended calmness of the heavens and earth,

Moonlight and stars, and empty streets, and sounds

Unfrequent as in deserts; at late hours

Of winter evenings, when unwholesome rains

Are falling hard, with people yet astir,

The feeble salutation from the voice

Of some unhappy woman, now and then

Heard as we pass, when no one looks about,

Nothing is listened to. But these, I fear,

Are falsely catalogued; things that are, are not,

As the mind answers to them, or the heart

Is prompt, or slow, to feel. What say you, then,

To times, when half the city shall break out

Full of one passion, vengeance, rage, or fear?

To executions, to a street on fire,

Mobs, riots, or rejoicings? From these sights

Take one,—that ancient festival, the Fair,

Holden where martyrs suffered in past time,

And named of St. Bartholomew; there, see

A work completed to our hands, that lays,

If any spectacle on earth can do,

The whole creative powers of man asleep!—

For once, the Muse's help will we implore,

And she shall lodge us, wafted on her wings,

Above the press and danger of the crowd,

Upon some showman's platform. What a shock

For eyes and ears! what anarchy and din,

Barbarian and infernal,—a phantasma,

Monstrous in colour, motion, shape, sight, sound!

Below, the open space, through every nook

Of the wide area, twinkles, is alive

With heads; the midway region, and above,

Is thronged with staring pictures and huge scrolls,

Dumb proclamations of the Prodigies;

With chattering monkeys dangling from their poles,

And children whirling in their roundabouts;

With those that stretch the neck and strain the eyes,

And crack the voice in rivalship, the crowd

Inviting; with buffoons against buffoons

Grimacing, writhing, screaming,—him who grinds

The hurdy-gurdy, at the fiddle weaves,

Rattles the salt-box, thumps the kettle-drum,

And him who at the trumpet puffs his cheeks,

The silver-collared Negro with his timbrel,

Equestrians, tumblers, women, girls, and boys,

Blue-breeched, pink-vested, with high-towering plumes.—

All moveables of wonder, from all parts,

Are here—Albinos, painted Indians, Dwarfs,

The Horse of knowledge, and the learned Pig,

The Stone-eater, the man that swallows fire,

Giants, Ventriloquists, the Invisible Girl,

The Bust that speaks and moves its goggling eyes,

The Wax-work, Clock-work, all the marvellous craft

Of modern Merlins, Wild Beasts, Puppet-shows,

All out-o'-the-way, far-fetched, perverted things,

All freaks of nature, all Promethean thoughts

Of man, his dullness, madness, and their feats

All jumbled up together, to compose

A Parliament of Monsters. Tents and Booths

Meanwhile, as if the whole were one vast mill,

Are vomiting, receiving on all sides,

Men, Women, three-years' Children, Babes in arms.



﻿Oh, blank confusion! true epitome

Of what the mighty City is herself,

To thousands upon thousands of her sons,

Living amid the same perpetual whirl

Of trivial objects, melted and reduced

To one identity, by differences

That have no law, no meaning, and no end—

Oppression, under which even highest minds

Must labour, whence the strongest are not free.

But though the picture weary out the eye,

By nature an unmanageable sight,

It is not wholly so to him who looks

In steadiness, who hath among least things

An under-sense of greatest; sees the parts

As parts, but with a feeling of the whole.

This, of all acquisitions, first awaits

On sundry and most widely different modes

Of education, nor with least delight

On that through which I passed. Attention springs,

And comprehensiveness and memory flow,

From early converse with the works of God

Among all regions; chiefly where appear

Most obviously simplicity and power.

Think, how the everlasting streams and woods,

Stretched and still stretching far and wide, exalt

The roving Indian, on his desert sands:

What grandeur not unfelt, what pregnant show

Of beauty, meets the sun-burnt Arab's eye:

And, as the sea propels, from zone to zone,

Its currents; magnifies its shoals of life

Beyond all compass; spreads, and sends aloft

Armies of clouds,—even so, its powers and aspects

Shape for mankind, by principles as fixed,

The views and aspirations of the soul

To majesty. Like virtue have the forms

Perennial of the ancient hills; nor less

The changeful language of their countenances

Quickens the slumbering mind, and aids the thoughts,

However multitudinous, to move

With order and relation. This, if still,

As hitherto, in freedom I may speak,

Not violating any just restraint,

As may be hoped, of real modesty,—

This did I feel, in London's vast domain.

The Spirit of Nature was upon me there;

The soul of Beauty and enduring Life

Vouchsafed her inspiration, and diffused,

Through meagre lines and colours, and the press

Of self-destroying, transitory things,

Composure, and ennobling Harmony.





BOOK EIGHTH.





RETROSPECT.—LOVE OF NATURE LEADING TO LOVE OF MAN.



What sounds are those, Helvellyn, that are heard

Up to thy summit, through the depth of air

Ascending, as if distance had the power

To make the sounds more audible? What crowd

Covers, or sprinkles o'er, yon village green?

Crowd seems it, solitary hill! to thee,

Though but a little family of men,

Shepherds and tillers of the ground—betimes

Assembled with their children and their wives,

And here and there a stranger interspersed.

They hold a rustic fair—a festival,

Such as, on this side now, and now on that,

Repeated through his tributary vales,

Helvellyn, in the silence of his rest,

Sees annually, if clouds towards either ocean

Blown from their favourite resting-place, or mists

Dissolved, have left him an unshrouded head.

Delightful day it is for all who dwell

In this secluded glen, and eagerly

They give it welcome. Long ere heat of noon,

From byre or field the kine were brought; the sheep

Are penned in cotes; the chaffering is begun.

The heifer lows, uneasy at the voice

Of a new master; bleat the flocks aloud.

Booths are there none; a stall or two is here;

A lame man or a blind, the one to beg,

The other to make music; hither, too,

From far, with basket, slung upon her arm,

Of hawker's wares—books, pictures, combs, and pins—

Some aged woman finds her way again,

Year after year, a punctual visitant!

There also stands a speech-maker by rote,

Pulling the strings of his boxed raree-show;

And in the lapse of many years may come

Prouder itinerant, mountebank, or he

Whose wonders in a covered wain lie hid.

But one there is, the loveliest of them all,

Some sweet lass of the valley, looking out

For gains, and who that sees her would not buy?

Fruits of her father's orchard, are her wares,

And with the ruddy produce, she walks round

Among the crowd, half pleased with half ashamed

Of her new office, blushing restlessly.

The children now are rich, for the old to-day

Are generous as the young; and, if content

With looking on, some ancient wedded pair

Sit in the shade together, while they gaze,

"A cheerful smile unbends the wrinkled brow,

The days departed start again to life,

And all the scenes of childhood reappear,

Faint, but more tranquil, like the changing sun

To him who slept at noon and wakes at eve." (9)

Thus gaiety and cheerfulness prevail,

Spreading from young to old, from old to young,

And no one seems to want his share.—Immense

Is the recess, the circumambient world

Magnificent, by which they are embraced:

They move about upon the soft green turf:

How little they, they and their doings, seem,

And all that they can further or obstruct!

Through utter weakness pitiably dear,

As tender infants are: and yet how great!

For all things serve them: them the morning light

Loves, as it glistens on the silent rocks;

And them the silent rocks, which now from high

Look down upon them; the reposing clouds;

The wild brooks prattling from invisible haunts;

And old Helvellyn, conscious of the stir

Which animates this day their calm abode.



﻿With deep devotion, Nature, did I feel,

In that enormous City's turbulent world

Of men and things, what benefit I owed

To thee, and those domains of rural peace,

Where to the sense of beauty first my heart

Was opened; tract more exquisitely fair

Than that famed paradise of ten thousand trees,

Or Gehol's matchless gardens, for delight

Of the Tartarian dynasty composed

(Beyond that mighty wall, not fabulous,

China's stupendous mound) by patient toil

Of myriads and boon nature's lavish help;

There, in a clime from widest empire chosen,

Fulfilling (could enchantment have done more?)

A sumptuous dream of flowery lawns, with domes

Of pleasure sprinkled over, shady dells

For eastern monasteries, sunny mounts

With temples crested, bridges, gondolas,

Rocks, dens, and groves of foliage taught to melt

Into each other their obsequious hues,

Vanished and vanishing in subtle chase,

Too fine to be pursued; or standing forth

In no discordant opposition, strong

And gorgeous as the colours side by side

Bedded among rich plumes of tropic birds;

And mountains over all, embracing all;

And all the landscape, endlessly enriched

With waters running, falling, or asleep.



﻿But lovelier far than this, the paradise

Where I was reared; in Nature's primitive gifts

Favoured no less, and more to every sense

Delicious, seeing that the sun and sky,

The elements, and seasons as they change,

Do find a worthy fellow-labourer there—

Man free, man working for himself, with choice

Of time, and place, and object; by his wants,

His comforts, native occupations, cares,

Cheerfully led to individual ends

Or social, and still followed by a train

Unwooed, unthought-of even—simplicity,

And beauty, and inevitable grace.



﻿Yea, when a glimpse of those imperial bowers

Would to a child be transport over-great,

When but a half-hour's roam through such a place

Would leave behind a dance of images,

That shall break in upon his sleep for weeks;

Even then the common haunts of the green earth,

And ordinary interests of man,

Which they embosom, all without regard

As both may seem, are fastening on the heart

Insensibly, each with the other's help.

For me, when my affections first were led

From kindred, friends, and playmates, to partake

Love for the human creature's absolute self,

That noticeable kindliness of heart

Sprang out of fountains, there abounding most

Where sovereign Nature dictated the tasks

And occupations which her beauty adorned,

And Shepherds were the men that pleased me first;

Not such as Saturn ruled 'mid Latian wilds,

With arts and laws so tempered, that their lives

Left, even to us toiling in this late day,

A bright tradition of the golden age;

Not such as, 'mid Arcadian fastnesses

Sequestered, handed down among themselves

Felicity, in Grecian song renowned;

Nor such as, when an adverse fate had driven,

From house and home, the courtly band whose fortunes

Entered, with Shakspeare's genius, the wild woods

Of Arden, amid sunshine or in shade,

Culled the best fruits of Time's uncounted hours,

Ere Phœbe sighed for the false Ganymede;

Or there where Perdita and Florizel

Together danced, Queen of the feast, and King;

Nor such as Spenser fabled. True it is,

That I had heard (what he perhaps had seen)

Of maids at sunrise bringing in from far

Their May-bush, and along the street in flocks

Parading with a song of taunting rhymes,

Aimed at the laggards slumbering within doors;

Had also heard, from those who yet remembered,

Tales of the May-pole dance, and wreaths that decked

Porch, door-way, or kirk-pillar; and of youths,

Each with his maid, before the sun was up,

By annual custom, issuing forth in troops,

To drink the waters of some sainted well,

And hang it round with garlands. Love survives;

But, for such purpose, flowers no longer grow:

The times, too sage, perhaps too proud, have dropped

These lighter graces; and the rural ways

And manners which my childhood looked upon

Were the unluxuriant produce of a life

Intent on little but substantial needs,

Yet rich in beauty, beauty that was felt.

But images of danger and distress,

Man suffering among awful Powers and Forms;

Of this I heard, and saw enough to make

Imagination restless; nor was free

Myself from frequent perils; nor were tales

Wanting,—the tragedies of former times,

Hazards and strange escapes, of which the rocks

Immutable and everflowing streams,

Where'er I roamed, were speaking monuments.



﻿Smooth life had flock and shepherd in old time,

Long springs and tepid winters, on the banks

Of delicate Galesus; and no less

Those scattered along Adria's myrtle shores:

Smooth life had herdsman, and his snow-white herd

To triumphs and to sacrificial rites

Devoted, on the inviolable stream

Of rich Clitumnus; and the goat-herd lived

As calmly, underneath the pleasant brows

Of cool Lucretilis, where the pipe was heard

Of Pan, Invisible God, thrilling the rocks

With tutelary music, from all harm

The fold protecting. I myself, mature

In manhood then, have seen a pastoral tract

Like one of these, where Fancy might run wild,

Though under skies less generous, less serene:

There, for her own delight had Nature framed

A pleasure-ground, diffused a fair expanse

Of level pasture, islanded with groves

And banked with woody risings; but the Plain

Endless, here opening widely out, and there

Shut up in lesser lakes or beds of lawn

And intricate recesses, creek or bay

Sheltered within a shelter, where at large

The shepherd strays, a rolling hut his home.

Thither he comes with spring-time, there abides

All summer, and at sunrise ye may hear

His flageolet to liquid notes of love

Attuned, or sprightly fife resounding far,

Nook is there none, nor tract of that vast space

Where passage opens, but the same shall have

In turn its visitant, telling there his hours

In unlaborious pleasure, with no task

More toilsome than to carve a beechen bowl

For spring or fountain, which the traveller finds,

When through the region he pursues at will

His devious course. A glimpse of such sweet life

I saw when, from the melancholy walls

Of Goslar, once imperial, I renewed

My daily walk along that wide champaign,

That, reaching to her gates, spreads east and west,

And northwards, from beneath the mountainous verge

Of the Hercynian forest. Yet, hail to you

Moors, mountains, headlands, and ye hollow vales,

Ye long deep channels for the Atlantic's voice,

Powers of my native region! Ye that seize

The heart with firmer grasp! Your snows and streams

Ungovernable, and your terrifying winds,

That howl so dismally for him who treads

Companionless your awful solitudes!

There, 'tis the shepherd's task the winter long

To wait upon the storms: of their approach

Sagacious, into sheltering coves he drives

His flock, and thither from the homestead bears

A toilsome burden up the craggy ways,

And deals it out, their regular nourishment

Strewn on the frozen snow. And when the spring

Looks out, and all the pastures dance with lambs,

And when the flock, with warmer weather, climbs

Higher and higher, him his office leads

To watch their goings, whatsoever track

The wanderers choose. For this he quits his home

At day-spring, and no sooner doth the sun

Begin to strike him with a fire-like heat,

Than he lies down upon some shining rock,

And breakfasts with his dog. When they have stolen,

As is their wont, a pittance from strict time,

For rest not needed or exchange of love,

Then from his couch he starts; and now his feet

Crush out a livelier fragrance from the flowers

Of lowly thyme, by Nature's skill enwrought

In the wild turf: the lingering dews of morn

Smoke round him, as from hill to hill he hies,

His staff protending like a hunter's spear,

Or by its aid leaping from crag to crag,

And o'er the brawling beds of unbridged streams.

Philosophy, methinks, at Fancy's call,

Might deign to follow him through what he does

Or sees in his day's march; himself he feels,

In those vast regions where his service lies,

A freeman, wedded to his life of hope

And hazard, and hard labour interchanged

With that majestic indolence so dear

To native man. A rambling school-boy, thus

I felt his presence in his own domain,

As of a lord and master, or a power,

Or genius, under Nature, under God,

Presiding; and severest solitude

Had more commanding looks when he was there.

When up the lonely brooks on rainy days

Angling I went, or trod the trackless hills

By mists bewildered, suddenly mine eyes

Have glanced upon him distant a few steps,

In size a giant, stalking through thick fog,

His sheep like Greenland bears; or, as he stepped

Beyond the boundary line of some hill-shadow,

His form hath flashed upon me, glorified

By the deep radiance of the setting sun:

Or him have I descried in distant sky,

A solitary object and sublime,

Above all height! like an aerial cross

Stationed alone upon a spiry rock

Of the Chartreuse, for worship. Thus was man

Ennobled outwardly before my sight,

And thus my heart was early introduced

To an unconscious love and reverence

Of human nature; hence the human form

To me became an index of delight,

Of grace and honour, power and worthiness.

Meanwhile this creature—spiritual almost

As those of books, but more exalted far;

Far more of an imaginative form

Than the gay Corin of the groves, who lives

For his own fancies, or to dance by the hour,

In coronal, with Phyllis in the midst—

Was, for the purposes of kind, a man

With the most common; husband, father; learned,

Could teach, admonish; suffered with the rest

From vice and folly, wretchedness and fear;

Of this I little saw, cared less for it,

But something must have felt.

﻿Call ye these appearances—

Which I beheld of shepherds in my youth,

This sanctity of Nature given to man—

A shadow, a delusion, ye who pore

On the dead letter, miss the spirit of things;

Whose truth is not a motion or a shape

Instinct with vital functions, but a block

Or waxen image which yourselves have made,

And ye adore! But blessed be the God

Of Nature and of Man that this was so;

That men before my inexperienced eyes

Did first present themselves thus purified,

Removed, and to a distance that was fit:

And so we all of us in some degree

Are led to knowledge, wheresoever led,

And howsoever; were it otherwise,

And we found evil fast as we find good

In our first years, or think that it is found,

How could the innocent heart bear up and live!

But doubly fortunate my lot; not here

Alone, that something of a better life

Perhaps was round me than it is the privilege

Of most to move in, but that first I looked

At Man through objects that were great or fair;

First communed with him by their help. And thus

Was founded a sure safeguard and defence

Against the weight of meanness, selfish cares,

Coarse manners, vulgar passions, that beat in

On all sides from the ordinary world

In which we traffic. Starting from this point

I had my face turned toward the truth, began

With an advantage furnished by that kind

Of prepossession, without which the soul

Receives no knowledge that can bring forth good,

No genuine insight ever comes to her.

From the restraint of over-watchful eyes

Preserved, I moved about, year after year,

Happy, and now most thankful that my walk

Was guarded from too early intercourse

With the deformities of crowded life,

And those ensuing laughters and contempts,

Self-pleasing, which, if we would wish to think

With a due reverence on earth's rightful lord,

Here placed to be the inheritor of heaven,

Will not permit us; but pursue the mind,

That to devotion willingly would rise,

Into the temple and the temple's heart.



﻿Yet deem not, Friend! that human kind with me

Thus early took a place pre-eminent;

Nature herself was, at this unripe time,

But secondary to my own pursuits

And animal activities, and all

Their trivial pleasures; and when these had drooped

And gradually expired, and Nature, prized

For her own sake, became my joy, even then—

And upwards through late youth, until not less

Than two-and-twenty summers had been told—

Was Man in my affections and regards

Subordinate to her, her visible forms

And viewless agencies: a passion, she,

A rapture often, and immediate love

Ever at hand; he, only a delight

Occasional, an accidental grace,

His hour being not yet come. Far less had then

The inferior creatures, beast or bird, attuned

My spirit to that gentleness of love

(Though they had long been carefully observed),

Won from me those minute obeisances

Of tenderness, which I may number now

With my first blessings. Nevertheless, on these

The light of beauty did not fall in vain,

Or grandeur circumfuse them to no end.



﻿But when that first poetic faculty

Of plain Imagination and severe,

No longer a mute influence of the soul,

Ventured, at some rash Muse's earnest call,

To try her strength among harmonious words;

And to book-notions and the rules of art

Did knowingly conform itself; there came

Among the simple shapes of human life

A wilfulness of fancy and conceit;

And Nature and her objects beautified

These fictions, as in some sort, in their turn,

They burnished her. From touch of this new power

Nothing was safe: the elder-tree that grew

Beside the well-known charnel-house had then

A dismal look: the yew-tree had its ghost,

That took his station there for ornament:

The dignities of plain occurrence then

Were tasteless, and truth's golden mean, a point

Where no sufficient pleasure could be found.

Then, if a widow, staggering with the blow

Of her distress, was known to have turned her steps

To the cold grave in which her husband slept,

One night, or haply more than one, through pain

Or half-insensate impotence of mind,

The fact was caught at greedily, and there

She must be visitant the whole year through,

Wetting the turf with never-ending tears.



﻿Through quaint obliquities I might pursue

These cravings; when the fox-glove, one by one,

Upwards through every stage of the tall stem,

Had shed beside the public way its bells,

And stood of all dismantled, save the last

Left at the tapering ladder's top, that seemed

To bend as doth a slender blade of grass

Tipped with a rain-drop, Fancy loved to seat,

Beneath the plant despoiled, but crested still

With this last relic, soon itself to fall,

Some vagrant mother, whose arch little ones,

All unconcerned by her dejected plight,

Laughed as with rival eagerness their hands

Gathered the purple cups that round them lay,

Strewing the turf's green slope.

﻿A diamond light

(Whene'er the summer sun, declining, smote

A smooth rock wet with constant springs) was seen

Sparkling from out a copse-clad bank that rose

Fronting our cottage. Oft beside the hearth

Seated, with open door, often and long

Upon this restless lustre have I gazed,

That made my fancy restless as itself.

'Twas now for me a burnished silver shield

Suspended over a knight's tomb, who lay

Inglorious, buried in the dusky wood:

An entrance now into some magic cave

Or palace built by fairies of the rock;

Nor could I have been bribed to disenchant

The spectacle, by visiting the spot.

Thus wilful Fancy, in no hurtful mood,

Engrafted far-fetched shapes on feelings bred

By pure Imagination: busy Power

She was, and with her ready pupil turned

Instinctively to human passions, then

Least understood. Yet, 'mid the fervent swarm

Of these vagaries, with an eye so rich

As mine was through the bounty of a grand

And lovely region, I had forms distinct

To steady me: each airy thought revolved

Round a substantial centre, which at once

Incited it to motion, and controlled.

I did not pine like one in cities bred,

As was thy melancholy lot, dear Friend!

Great Spirit as thou art, in endless dreams

Of sickliness, disjoining, joining, things

Without the light of knowledge. Where the harm,

If, when the woodman languished with disease

Induced by sleeping nightly on the ground

Within his sod-built cabin, Indian-wise,

I called the pangs of disappointed love,

And all the sad etcetera of the wrong,

To help him to his grave. Meanwhile the man,

If not already from the woods retired

To die at home, was haply as I knew,

Withering by slow degrees, 'mid gentle airs,

Birds, running streams, and hills so beautiful

On golden evenings, while the charcoal pile

Breathed up its smoke, an image of his ghost

Or spirit that full soon must take her flight.

Nor shall we not be tending towards that point

Of sound humanity to which our Tale

Leads, though by sinuous ways, if here I shew

How Fancy, in a season when she wove

Those slender cords, to guide the unconscious Boy

For the Man's sake, could feed at Nature's call

Some pensive musings which might well beseem

Maturer years.

﻿A grove there is whose boughs

Stretch from the western marge of Thurston-mere,

With length of shade so thick, that whoso glides

Along the line of low-roofed water, moves

As in a cloister. Once—while, in that shade

Loitering, I watched the golden beams of light

Flung from the setting sun, as they reposed

In silent beauty on the naked ridge

Of a high eastern hill—thus flowed my thoughts

In a pure stream of words fresh from the heart:

(10) Dear native Regions, wheresoe'er shall close

My mortal course, there will I think on you;

Dying, will cast on you a backward look;

Even as this setting sun (albeit the Vale

Is no where touched by one memorial gleam)

Doth with the fond remains of his last power

Still linger, and a farewell lustre sheds

On the dear mountain-tops where first he rose.



﻿Enough of humble arguments; recal,

My Song! those high emotions which thy voice

Has heretofore made known; that bursting forth

Of sympathy, inspiring and inspired,

When everywhere a vital pulse was felt,

And all the several frames of things, like stars,

Through every magnitude distinguishable,

Shone mutually indebted, or half lost

Each in the other's blaze, a galaxy

Of life and glory. In the midst stood Man,

Outwardly, inwardly contemplated,

As, of all visible natures, crown, though born

Of dust, and kindred to the worm; a Being,

Both in perception and discernment, first

In every capability of rapture,

Through the divine effect of power and love;

As, more than anything we know, instinct

With godhead, and, by reason and by will,

Acknowledging dependency sublime.



﻿Ere long, the lonely mountains left, I moved,

Begirt, from day to day, with temporal shapes

Of vice and folly thrust upon my view,

Objects of sport, and ridicule, and scorn,

Manners and characters discriminate,

And little bustling passions that eclipse,

As well they might, the impersonated thought,

The idea, or abstraction of the kind.



﻿An idler among academic bowers,

Such was my new condition, as at large

Has been set forth; yet here the vulgar light

Of present, actual, superficial life,

Gleaming through colouring of other times,

Old usages and local privilege,

Was welcome, softened, if not solemnised.

This notwithstanding, being brought more near

To vice and guilt, forerunning wretchedness,

I trembled,—thought, at times, of human life

With an indefinite terror and dismay,

Such as the storms and angry elements

Had bred in me; but gloomier far, a dim

Analogy to uproar and misrule,

Disquiet, danger, and obscurity.



﻿It might be told (but wherefore speak of things

Common to all?) that, seeing, I was led

Gravely to ponder—judging between good

And evil, not as for the mind's delight

But for her guidance—one who was to act,

As sometimes to the best of feeble means

I did, by human sympathy impelled:

And, through dislike and most offensive pain,

Was to the truth conducted; of this faith

Never forsaken, that, by acting well,

And understanding, I should learn to love

The end of life, and every thing we know.



﻿Grave Teacher, stern Preceptress! for at times

Thou canst put on an aspect most severe;

London, to thee I willingly return.

Erewhile my verse played idly with the flowers

Enwrought upon thy mantle; satisfied

With that amusement, and a simple look

Of child-like inquisition now and then

Cast upwards on thy countenance, to detect

Some inner meanings which might harbour there.

But how could I in mood so light indulge,

Keeping such fresh remembrance of the day,

When, having thridded the long labyrinth

Of the suburban villages, I first

Entered thy vast dominion? On the roof

Of an itinerant vehicle I sate,

With vulgar men about me, trivial forms

Of houses, pavement, streets, of men and things,—

Mean shapes on every side: but, at the instant,

When to myself it fairly might be said,

The threshold now is overpast, (how strange

That aught external to the living mind

Should have such mighty sway! yet so it was),

A weight of ages did at once descend

Upon my heart; no thought embodied, no

Distinct remembrances, but weight and power,—

Power growing under weight: alas! I feel

That I am trifling: 'twas a moment's pause,—

All that took place within me came and went

As in a moment; yet with Time it dwells,

And grateful memory, as a thing divine.



﻿The curious traveller, who, from open day,

Hath passed with torches into some huge cave,

The Grotto of Antiparos, or the Den

In old time haunted by that Danish Witch,

Yordas; he looks around and sees the vault

Widening on all sides; sees, or thinks he sees,

Erelong, the massy roof above his head,

That instantly unsettles and recedes,—

Substance and shadow, light and darkness, all

Commingled, making up a canopy

Of shapes and forms and tendencies to shape

That shift and vanish, change and interchange

Like spectres,—ferment silent and sublime!

That after a short space works less and less,

Till, every effort, every motion gone,

The scene before him stands in perfect view

Exposed, and lifeless as a written book!—

But let him pause awhile, and look again,

And a new quickening shall succeed, at first

Beginning timidly, then creeping fast,

Till the whole cave, so late a senseless mass,

Busies the eye with images and forms

Boldly assembled,—here is shadowed forth

From the projections, wrinkles, cavities,

A variegated landscape,—there the shape

Of some gigantic warrior clad in mail,

The ghostly semblance of a hooded monk,

Veiled nun, or pilgrim resting on his staff:

Strange congregation! yet not slow to meet

Eyes that perceive through minds that can inspire.



﻿Even in such sort had I at first been moved,

Nor otherwise continued to be moved,

As I explored the vast metropolis,

Fount of my country's destiny and the world's;

That great emporium, chronicle at once

And burial-place of passions, and their home

Imperial, their chief living residence.



﻿With strong sensations teeming as it did

Of past and present, such a place must needs

Have pleased me, seeking knowledge at that time

Far less than craving power; yet knowledge came,

Sought or unsought, and influxes of power

Came, of themselves, or at her call derived

In fits of kindliest apprehensiveness,

From all sides, when whate'er was in itself

Capacious found, or seemed to find, in me

A correspondent amplitude of mind;

Such is the strength and glory of our youth!

The human nature unto which I felt

That I belonged, and reverenced with love,

Was not a punctual presence, but a spirit

Diffused through time and space, with aid derived

Of evidence from monuments, erect,

Prostrate, or leaning towards their common rest

In earth, the widely scattered wreck sublime

Of vanished nations, or more clearly drawn

From books and what they picture and record.



﻿'Tis true, the history of our native land,

With those of Greece compared and popular Rome,

And in our high-wrought modern narratives

Stript of their harmonising soul, the life

Of manners and familiar incidents,

Had never much delighted me. And less

Than other intellects had mine been used

To lean upon extrinsic circumstance

Of record or tradition; but a sense

Of what in the Great City had been done

And suffered, and was doing, suffering, still,

Weighed with me, could support the test of thought;

And, in despite of all that had gone by,

Or was departing never to return,

There I conversed with majesty and power

Like independent natures. Hence the place

Was thronged with impregnations like the Wilds

In which my early feelings had been nursed—

Bare hills and valleys, full of caverns, rocks,

And audible seclusions, dashing lakes,

Echoes and waterfalls, and pointed crags

That into music touch the passing wind.

Here then my young imagination found

No uncongenial element; could here

Among new objects serve or give command,

Even as the heart's occasions might require,

To forward reason's else too scrupulous march.

The effect was, still more elevated views

Of human nature. Neither vice nor guilt,

Debasement undergone by body or mind,

Nor all the misery forced upon my sight,

Misery not lightly passed, but sometimes scanned

Most feelingly, could overthrow my trust

In what we may become; induce belief

That I was ignorant, had been falsely taught,

A solitary, who with vain conceits

Had been inspired, and walked about in dreams.

From those sad scenes when meditation turned,

Lo! every thing that was indeed divine

Retained its purity inviolate,

Nay brighter shone, by this portentous gloom

Set off; such opposition as aroused

The mind of Adam, yet in Paradise

Though fallen from bliss, when in the East he saw

(11) Darkness ere day's mid course, and morning light

More orient in the western cloud, that drew

O'er the blue firmament a radiant white,

Descending slow with something heavenly fraught.



﻿Add also, that among the multitudes

Of that huge city, oftentimes was seen

Affectingly set forth, more than elsewhere

Is possible, the unity of man,

One spirit over ignorance and vice

Predominant, in good and evil hearts;

One sense for moral judgments, as one eye

For the sun's light. The soul when smitten thus

By a sublime idea, whencesoe'er

Vouchsafed for union or communion, feeds

On the pure bliss, and takes her rest with God.



﻿Thus from a very early age, O Friend!

My thoughts by slow gradations had been drawn

To human-kind, and to the good and ill

Of human life: Nature had led me on;

And oft amid the "busy hum" I seemed

To travel independent of her help,

As if I had forgotten her; but no,

The world of human-kind outweighed not hers

In my habitual thoughts; the scale of love,

Though filling daily, still was light, compared

With that in which her mighty objects lay.





BOOK NINTH.





RESIDENCE IN FRANCE.



Even as a river,—partly (it might seem)

Yielding to old remembrances, and swayed

In part by fear to shape a way direct,

That would engulph him soon in the ravenous sea—

Turns, and will measure back his course, far back,

Seeking the very regions which he crossed

In his first outset; so have we, my Friend!

Turned and returned with intricate delay.

Or as a traveller, who has gained the brow

Of some aerial Down, while there he halts

For breathing-time, is tempted to review

The region left behind him; and, if aught

Deserving notice have escaped regard,

Or been regarded with too careless eye,

Strives, from that height, with one and yet one more

Last look, to make the best amends he may:

So have we lingered. Now we start afresh

With courage, and new hope risen on our toil.

Fair greetings to this shapeless eagerness,

Whene'er it comes! needful in work so long,

Thrice needful to the argument which now

Awaits us! Oh, how much unlike the past!



﻿Free as a colt at pasture on the hill,

I ranged at large, through London's wide domain,

Month after month. Obscurely did I live,

Not seeking frequent intercourse with men,

By literature, or elegance, or rank,

Distinguished. Scarcely was a year thus spent

Ere I forsook the crowded solitude,

With less regret for its luxurious pomp,

And all the nicely-guarded shows of art,

Than for the humble book-stalls in the streets,

Exposed to eye and hand where'er I turned.



﻿France lured me forth; the realm that I had crossed

So lately, journeying toward the snow-clad Alps.

But now, relinquishing the scrip and staff,

And all enjoyment which the summer sun

Sheds round the steps of those who meet the day

With motion constant as his own, I went

Prepared to sojourn in a pleasant town,

Washed by the current of the stately Loire.



﻿Through Paris lay my readiest course, and there

Sojourning a few days, I visited,

In haste, each spot of old or recent fame,

The latter chiefly; from the field of Mars

Down to the suburbs of St. Antony,

And from Mont Martyr southward to the Dome

Of Geneviève. In both her clamorous Halls,

The National Synod and the Jacobins,

I saw the Revolutionary Power

Toss like a ship at anchor, rocked by storms;

The Arcades I traversed, in the Palace huge

Of Orleans; coasted round and round the line

Of Tavern, Brothel, Gaming-house, and Shop,

Great rendezvous of worst and best, the walk

Of all who had a purpose, or had not;

I stared and listened, with a stranger's ears,

To Hawkers and Haranguers, hubbub wild!

And hissing Factionists with ardent eyes,

In knots, or pairs, or single. Not a look

Hope takes, or Doubt or Fear is forced to wear,

But seemed there present; and I scanned them all,

Watched every gesture uncontrollable,

Of anger, and vexation, and despite,

All side by side, and struggling face to face,

With gaiety and dissolute idleness.



﻿Where silent zephyrs sported with the dust

Of the Bastille, I sate in the open sun,

And from the rubbish gathered up a stone,

And pocketed the relic, in the guise

Of an enthusiast; yet, in honest truth,

I looked for something that I could not find,

Affecting more emotion than I felt;

For 'tis most certain, that these various sights,

However potent their first shock, with me

Appeared to recompense the traveller's pains

Less than the painted Magdalene of Le Brun,

A beauty exquisitely wrought, with hair

Dishevelled, gleaming eyes, and rueful cheek

Pale and bedropped with overflowing tears.



﻿But hence to my more permanent abode

I hasten; there, by novelties in speech,

Domestic manners, customs, gestures, looks,

And all the attire of ordinary life,

Attention was engrossed; and, thus amused,

I stood, 'mid those concussions, unconcerned,

Tranquil almost, and careless as a flower

Glassed in a green-house, or a parlour shrub

That spreads its leaves in unmolested peace,

While every bush and tree, the country through,

Is shaking to the roots: indifference this

Which may seem strange: but I was unprepared

With needful knowledge, had abruptly passed

Into a theatre, whose stage was filled

And busy with an action far advanced.

Like others, I had skimmed, and sometimes read

With care, the master pamphlets of the day;

Nor wanted such half-insight as grew wild

Upon that meagre soil, helped out by talk

And public news; but having never seen

A chronicle that might suffice to show

Whence the main organs of the public power

Had sprung, their transmigrations, when and how

Accomplished, giving thus unto events

A form and body; all things were to me

Loose and disjointed, and the affections left

Without a vital interest. At that time,

Moreover, the first storm was overblown,

And the strong hand of outward violence

Locked up in quiet. For myself, I fear

Now in connection with so great a theme

To speak (as I must be compelled to do)

Of one so unimportant; night by night

Did I frequent the formal haunts of men,

Whom, in the city, privilege of birth

Sequestered from the rest, societies

Polished in arts, and in punctilio versed;

Whence, and from deeper causes, all discourse

Of good and evil of the time was shunned

With scrupulous care; but these restrictions soon

Proved tedious, and I gradually withdrew

Into a noisier world, and thus ere long

Became a patriot; and my heart was all

Given to the people, and my love was theirs.



﻿A band of military Officers,

Then stationed in the city, were the chief

Of my associates: some of these wore swords

That had been seasoned in the wars, and all

Were men well-born; the chivalry of France.

In age and temper differing, they had yet

One spirit ruling in each heart; alike

(Save only one, hereafter to be named)

Were bent upon undoing what was done:

This was their rest and only hope; therewith

No fear had they of bad becoming worse,

For worst to them was come; nor would have stirred,

Or deemed it worth a moment's thought to stir,

In any thing, save only as the act

Looked thitherward. One, reckoning by years,

Was in the prime of manhood, and erewhile

He had sate lord in many tender hearts;

Though heedless of such honours now, and changed:

His temper was quite mastered by the times,

And they had blighted him, had eaten away

The beauty of his person, doing wrong

Alike to body and to mind: his port,

Which once had been erect and open, now

Was stooping and contracted, and a face,

Endowed by Nature with her fairest gifts

Of symmetry and light and bloom, expressed,

As much as any that was ever seen,

A ravage out of season, made by thoughts

Unhealthy and vexatious. With the hour,

That from the press of Paris duly brought

Its freight of public news, the fever came,

A punctual visitant, to shake this man,

Disarmed his voice and fanned his yellow cheek

Into a thousand colours; while he read,

Or mused, his sword was haunted by his touch

Continually, like an uneasy place

In his own body. 'Twas in truth an hour

Of universal ferment; mildest men

Were agitated; and commotions, strife

Of passion and opinion, filled the walls

Of peaceful houses with unquiet sounds.

The soil of common life, was, at that time,

Too hot to tread upon. Oft said I then,

And not then only, "What a mockery this

Of history, the past and that to come!

Now do I feel how all men are deceived,

Reading of nations and their works, in faith,

Faith given to vanity and emptiness;

Oh! laughter for the page that would reflect

To future times the face of what now is!"

The land all swarmed with passion, like a plain

Devoured by locusts,—Carra, Gorcas,—add

A hundred other names, forgotten now,

Nor to be heard of more; yet, they were powers,

Like earthquakes, shocks repeated day by day,

And felt through every nook of town and field.



﻿Such was the state of things. Meanwhile the chief

Of my associates stood prepared for flight

To augment the band of emigrants in arms

Upon the borders of the Rhine, and leagued

With foreign foes mustered for instant war.

This was their undisguised intent, and they

Were waiting with the whole of their desires

The moment to depart.

﻿An Englishman,

Born in a land whose very name appeared

To license some unruliness of mind;

A stranger, with youth's further privilege,

And the indulgence that a half-learnt speech

Wins from the courteous; I, who had been else

Shunned and not tolerated, freely lived

With these defenders of the Crown, and talked,

And heard their notions; nor did they disdain

The wish to bring me over to their cause.



﻿But though untaught by thinking or by books

To reason well of polity or law,

And nice distinctions, then on every tongue,

Of natural rights and civil; and to acts

Of nations and their passing interests,

(If with unworldly ends and aims compared)

Almost indifferent, even the historian's tale

Prizing but little otherwise than I prized

Tales of the poets, as it made the heart

Beat high, and filled the fancy with fair forms,

Old heroes and their sufferings and their deeds;

Yet in the regal sceptre, and the pomp

Of orders and degrees, I nothing found

Then, or had ever, even in crudest youth,

That dazzled me, but rather what I mourned

And ill could brook, beholding that the best

Ruled not, and feeling that they ought to rule.



﻿For, born in a poor district, and which yet

Retaineth more of ancient homeliness,

Than any other nook of English ground,

It was my fortune scarcely to have seen,

Through the whole tenor of my school-day time,

The face of one, who, whether boy or man,

Was vested with attention or respect

Through claims of wealth or blood; nor was it least

Of many benefits, in later years

Derived from academic institutes

And rules, that they held something up to view

Of a Republic, where all stood thus far

Upon equal ground; that we were brothers all

In honour, as in one community,

Scholars and gentlemen; where, furthermore,

Distinction open lay to all that came,

And wealth and titles were in less esteem

Than talents, worth, and prosperous industry.

Add unto this, subservience from the first

To presences of God's mysterious power

Made manifest in Nature's sovereignty,

And fellowship with venerable books,

To sanction the proud workings of the soul,

And mountain liberty. It could not be

But that one tutored thus should look with awe

Upon the faculties of man, receive

Gladly the highest promises, and hail,

As best, the government of equal rights

And individual worth. And hence, O Friend!

If at the first great outbreak I rejoiced

Less than might well befit my youth, the cause

In part lay here, that unto me the events

Seemed nothing out of nature's certain course,

A gift that was come rather late than soon.

No wonder, then, if advocates like these,

Inflamed by passion, blind with prejudice,

And stung with injury, at this riper day,

Were impotent to make my hopes put on

The shape of theirs, my understanding bend

In honour to their honour: zeal, which yet

Had slumbered, now in opposition burst

Forth like a Polar summer: every word

They uttered was a dart, by counter-winds

Blown back upon themselves; their reason seemed

Confusion-stricken by a higher power

Than human understanding, their discourse

Maimed, spiritless; and, in their weakness strong,

I triumphed.

﻿Meantime, day by day, the roads

Were crowded with the bravest youth of France,

And all the promptest of her spirits, linked

In gallant soldiership, and posting on

To meet the war upon her frontier bounds.

Yet at this very moment do tears start

Into mine eyes: I do not say I weep—

I wept not then,—but tears have dimmed my sight,

In memory of the farewells of that time,

Domestic severings, female fortitude

At dearest separation, patriot love

And self-devotion, and terrestrial hope,

Encouraged with a martyr's confidence;

Even files of strangers merely seen but once,

And for a moment, men from far with sound

Of music, martial tunes, and banners spread,

Entering the city, here and there a face,

Or person singled out among the rest,

Yet still a stranger and beloved as such;

Even by these passing spectacles my heart

Was oftentimes uplifted, and they seemed

Arguments sent from Heaven to prove the cause

Good, pure, which no one could stand up against,

Who was not lost, abandoned, selfish, proud,

Mean, miserable, wilfully depraved,

Hater perverse of equity and truth.



﻿Among that band of Officers was one,

Already hinted at of other mould—

A patriot, thence rejected by the rest,

And with an oriental loathing spurned,

As of a different caste. A meeker man

Than this lived never, nor a more benign,

Meek though enthusiastic. Injuries

Made him more gracious, and his nature then

Did breathe its sweetness out most sensibly,

As aromatic flowers on Alpine turf,

When foot hath crushed them. He through the events

Of that great change wandered in perfect faith,

As through a book, an old romance, or tale

Of Fairy, or some dream of actions wrought

Behind the summer clouds. By birth he ranked

With the most noble, but unto the poor

Among mankind he was in service bound,

As by some tie invisible, oaths professed

To a religious order. Man he loved

As man; and, to the mean and the obscure,

And all the homely in their homely works,

Transferred a courtesy which had no air

Of condescension; but did rather seem

A passion and a gallantry, like that

Which he, a soldier, in his idler day

Had paid to woman: somewhat vain he was,

Or seemed so, yet it was not vanity,

But fondness, and a kind of radiant joy

Diffused around him, while he was intent

On works of love or freedom, or revolved

Complacently the progress of a cause,

Whereof he was a part: yet this was meek

And placid, and took nothing from the man

That was delightful. Oft in solitude

With him did I discourse about the end

Of civil government, and its wisest forms;

Of ancient loyalty, and chartered rights,

Custom and habit, novelty and change;

Of self-respect, and virtue in the few

For patrimonial honour set apart,

And ignorance in the labouring multitude.

For he, to all intolerance indisposed,

Balanced these contemplations in his mind;

And I, who at that time was scarcely dipped

Into the turmoil, bore a sounder judgment

Than later days allowed; carried about me,

With less alloy to its integrity,

The experience of past ages, as, through help

Of books and common life, it makes sure way

To youthful minds, by objects over near

Not pressed upon, nor dazzled or misled

By struggling with the crowd for present ends.



﻿But though not deaf, nor obstinate to find

Error without excuse upon the side

Of them who strove against us, more delight

We took, and let this freely be confessed,

In painting to ourselves the miseries

Of royal courts, and that voluptuous life

Unfeeling, where the man who is of soul

The meanest thrives the most; where dignity,

True personal dignity, abideth not;

A light, a cruel, and vain world cut off

From the natural inlets of just sentiment,

From lowly sympathy and chastening truth;

Where good and evil interchange their names,

And thirst for bloody spoils abroad is paired

With vice at home. "We added dearest themes—

Man and his noble nature, as it is

The gift which God has placed within his power,

His blind desires and steady faculties

Capable of clear truth, the one to break

Bondage, the other to build liberty

On firm foundations, making social life,

Through knowledge spreading and imperishable,

As just in regulation, and as pure

As individual in the wise and good.



﻿We summoned up the honourable deeds

Of ancient Story, thought of each bright spot,

That would be found in all recorded time,

Of truth preserved and error passed away;

Of single spirits that catch the flame from Heaven,

And how the multitudes of men will feed

And fan each other; thought of sects, how keen

They are to put the appropriate nature on,

Triumphant over every obstacle

Of custom, language, country, love, or hate,

And what they do and suffer for their creed;

How far they travel, and how long endure;

How quickly mighty Nations have been formed,

From least beginnings; how, together locked

By new opinions, scattered tribes have made

One body, spreading wide as clouds in heaven.

To aspirations then of our own minds

Did we appeal; and, finally, beheld

A living confirmation of the whole

Before us, in a people from the depth

Of shameful imbecility uprisen,

Fresh as the morning star. Elate we looked

Upon their virtues; saw, in rudest men,

Self-sacrifice the firmest; generous love,

And continence of mind, and sense of right,

Uppermost in the midst of fiercest strife.



﻿Oh, sweet it is, in academic groves,

Or such retirement, Friend! as we have known

In the green dales beside our Rotha's stream,

Greta, or Derwent, or some nameless rill,

To ruminate, with interchange of talk,

On rational liberty, and hope in man,

Justice and peace. But far more sweet such toil—

Toil, say I, for it leads to thoughts abstruse—

If nature then be standing on the brink

Of some great trial, and we hear the voice

Of one devoted,—one whom circumstance

Hath called upon to embody his deep sense

In action, give it outwardly a shape,

And that of benediction, to the world.

Then doubt is not, and truth is more than truth,—

A hope it is, and a desire; a creed

Of zeal, by an authority Divine

Sanctioned, of danger, difficulty, or death.

Such conversation, under Attic shades,

Did Dion hold with Plato; ripened thus

For a Deliverer's glorious task,—and such

He, on that ministry already bound,

Held with Eudemus and Timonides,

Surrounded by adventurers in arms,

When those two vessels with their daring freight,

For the Sicilian Tyrant's overthrow,

Sailed from Zacynthus,—philosophic war,

Led by Philosophers. With harder fate,

Though like ambition, such was he, O Friend!

Of whom I speak. So Beaupuis (let the name

Stand near the worthiest of Antiquity)

Fashioned his life; and many a long discourse,

With like persuasion honoured, we maintained:

He, on his part, accoutred for the worst.

He perished fighting, in supreme command,

Upon the borders of the unhappy Loire,

For liberty, against deluded men,

His fellow country-men; and yet most blessed

In this, that he the fate of later times

Lived not to see, nor what we now behold,

Who have as ardent hearts as he had then.



﻿Along that very Loire, with festal mirth

Resounding at all hours, and innocent yet

Of civil slaughter, was our frequent walk;

Or in wide forests of continuous shade,

Lofty and over-arched, with open space

Beneath the trees, clear footing many a mile—

A solemn region. Oft amid those haunts,

From earnest dialogues I slipped in thought,

And let remembrance steal to other times,

When, o'er those interwoven roots, moss-clad,

And smooth as marble or a waveless sea,

Some Hermit, from his cell forth-strayed, might pace

In sylvan meditation undisturbed;

As on the pavement of a Gothic church

Walks a lone Monk, when service hath expired,

In peace and silence. But if e'er was heard,—

Heard, though unseen,—a devious traveller,

Retiring or approaching from afar

With speed and echoes loud of trampling hoofs

From the hard floor reverberated, then

It was Angelica thundering through the woods

Upon her palfrey, or that gentle maid

Erminia, fugitive as fair as she.

Sometimes methought I saw a pair of knights

Joust underneath the trees, that as in storm

Rocked high above their heads; anon, the din

Of boisterous merriment, and music's roar,

In sudden proclamation, burst from haunt

Of Satyrs in some viewless glade, with dance

Rejoicing o'er a female in the midst,

A mortal beauty, their unhappy thrall.

The width of those huge forests, unto me

A novel scene, did often in this way

Master my fancy while I wandered on

With that revered companion. And sometimes—

When to a convent in a meadow green,

By a brook-side, we came, a roofless pile,

And not by reverential touch of Time

Dismantled, but by violence abrupt—

In spite of those heart-bracing colloquies,

In spite of real fervour, and of that

Less genuine and wrought up within myself—

I could not but bewail a wrong so harsh,

And for the Matin-bell to sound no more

Grieved, and the twilight taper, and the cross

High on the topmost pinnacle, a sign

(How welcome to the weary traveller's eyes!)

Of hospitality and peaceful rest.

And when the partner of those varied walks

Pointed upon occasion to the site

Of Romorentin, home of ancient kings,

To the imperial edifice of Blois,

Or to that rural castle, name now slipped

From my remembrance, where a lady lodged,

By the first Francis wooed, and bound to him

In chains of mutual passion, from the tower,

As a tradition of the country tells,

Practised to commune with her royal knight

By cressets and love-beacons, intercourse

'Twixt her high-seated residence and his

Far off at Chambord on the plain beneath;

Even here, though less than with the peaceful house

Religious, 'mid those frequent monuments

Of Kings, their vices and their better deeds,

Imagination, potent to inflame

At times with virtuous wrath and noble scorn,

Did also often mitigate the force

Of civic prejudice, the bigotry,

So call it, of a youthful patriot's mind;

And on these spots with many gleams I looked

Of chivalrous delight. Yet not the less,

Hatred of absolute rule, where will of one

Is law for all, and of that barren pride

In them who, by immunities unjust,

Between the sovereign and the people stand,

His helper and not theirs, laid stronger hold

Daily upon me, mixed with pity too

And love; for where hope is, there love will be

For the abject multitude. And when we chanced

One day to meet a hunger-bitten girl,

Who crept along fitting her languid gait

Unto a heifer's motion, by a cord

Tied to her arm, and picking thus from the lane

Its sustenance, while the girl with pallid hands

Was busy knitting in a heartless mood

Of solitude, and at the sight my friend

In agitation said, "'Tis against that

That we are fighting," I with him believed

That a benignant spirit was abroad

Which might not be withstood, that poverty

Abject as this would in a little time

Be found no more, that we should see the earth

Unthwarted in her wish to recompense

The meek, the lowly, patient child of toil,

All institutes for ever blotted out

That legalised exclusion, empty pomp

Abolished, sensual state and cruel power,

Whether by edict of the one or few;

And finally, as sum and crown of all,

Should see the people having a strong hand

In framing their own laws; whence better days

To all mankind. But, these things set apart,

Was not this single confidence enough

To animate the mind that ever turned

A thought to human welfare? That henceforth

Captivity by mandate without law

Should cease; and open accusation lead

To sentence in the hearing of the world,

And open punishment, if not the air

Be free to breathe in, and the heart of man

Dread nothing. From this height I shall not stoop

To humbler matter that detained us oft

In thought or conversation, public acts,

And public persons, and emotions wrought

Within the breast, as ever-varying winds

Of record or report swept over us;

But I might here, instead, repeat a tale,(12)

Told by my Patriot friend, of sad events,

That prove to what low depth had struck the roots,

How widely spread the boughs, of that old tree

Which, as a deadly mischief, and a foul

And black dishonour, France was weary of.



﻿Oh, happy time of youthful lovers, (thus

The story might begin). Oh, balmy time,

In which a love-knot, on a lady's brow,

Is fairer than the fairest star in Heaven!

So might—and with that prelude did begin

The record; and, in faithful verse, was given

The doleful sequel.

﻿But our little bark

On a strong river boldly hath been launched;

And from the driving current should we turn

To loiter wilfully within a creek,

Howe'er attractive, Fellow voyager!

Would' st thou not chide? Yet deem not my pains lost:

For Vaudracour and Julia (so were named

The ill-fated pair) in that plain tale will draw

Tears from the hearts of others, when their own

Shall beat no more. Thou, also, there mayst read,

At leisure, how the enamoured youth was driven,

By public power abased, to fatal crime,

Nature's rebellion against monstrous law;

How, between heart and heart, oppression thrust

Her mandates, severing whom true love had joined,

Harassing both; until he sank and pressed

The couch his fate had made for him; supine,

Save when the stings of viperous remorse,

Trying their strength, enforced him to start up,

Aghast and prayerless. Into a deep wood

He fled, to shun the haunts of human kind;

There dwelt, weakened in spirit more and more;

Nor could the voice of Freedom, which through France

Full speedily resounded, public hope,

Or personal memory of his own worst wrongs,

Rouse him; but, hidden in those gloomy shades,

His days he wasted,—an imbecile mind.





BOOK TENTH.





RESIDENCE IN FRANCE.—(Continued.)



It was a beautiful and silent day

That overspread the countenance of earth,

Then fading with unusual quietness,—

A day as beautiful as e'er was given

To soothe regret, though deepening what it soothed,

When by the gliding Loire I paused, and cast

Upon his rich domains, vineyard and tilth,

Green meadow-ground, and many-coloured woods,

Again, and yet again, a farewell look;

Then from the quiet of that scene passed on,

Bound to the fierce Metropolis. From his throne

The King had fallen, and that invading host—

Presumptuous cloud, on whose black front was written

The tender mercies of the dismal wind

That bore it—on the plains of Liberty

Had burst innocuous. Say in bolder words,

They—who had come elate as eastern hunters

Banded beneath the Great Mogul, when he

Erewhile went forth from Agra or Lahore,

Rajahs and Omrahs in his train, intent

To drive their prey enclosed within a ring

Wide as a province, but, the signal given,

Before the point of the life-threatening spear

Narrowing itself by moments—they, rash men,

Had seen the anticipated quarry turned

Into avengers, from whose wrath they fled

In terror. Disappointment and dismay

Remained for all whose fancies had run wild

With evil expectations; confidence

And perfect triumph for the better cause.



﻿The State, as if to stamp the final seal

On her security, and to the world

Show what she was, a high and fearless soul,

Exulting in defiance, or heart-stung

By sharp resentment, or belike to taunt

With spiteful gratitude the baffled League,

That had stirred up her slackening faculties

To a new transition, when the King was crushed,

Spared not the empty throne, and in proud haste

Assumed the body and venerable name

Of a Republic. Lamentable crimes,

'Tis true, had gone before this hour, dire work

Of massacre, in which the senseless sword

Was prayed to as a judge; but these were past,

Earth free from them for ever, as was thought,—

Ephemeral monsters, to be seen but once!

Things that could only show themselves and die.



﻿Cheered with this hope, to Paris I returned,

And ranged, with ardour heretofore unfelt,

The spacious city, and in progress passed

The prison where the unhappy Monarch lay,

Associate with his children and his wife

In bondage; and the palace, lately stormed

With roar of cannon by a furious host.

I crossed the square (an empty area then!)

Of the Carrousel, where so late had lain

The dead, upon the dying heaped, and gazed

On this and other spots, as doth a man

Upon a volume whose contents he knows

Are memorable, but from him locked up,

Being written in a tongue he cannot read,

So that he questions the mute leaves with pain,

And half upbraids their silence. But that night

I felt most deeply in what world I was,

What ground I trod on, and what air I breathed.

High was my room and lonely, near the roof

Of a large mansion or hotel, a lodge

That would have pleased me in more quiet times;

Nor was it wholly without pleasure then.

With unextinguished taper I kept watch,

Reading at intervals; the fear gone by

Pressed on me almost like a fear to come.

I thought of those September massacres,

Divided from me by one little month,

Saw them and touched: the rest was conjured up

From tragic fictions or true history,

Remembrances and dim admonishments.

The horse is taught his manage, and no star

Of wildest course but treads back his own steps;

For the spent hurricane the air provides

As fierce a successor; the tide retreats

But to return out of its hiding-place

In the great deep; all things have second birth;

The earthquake is not satisfied at once;

And in this way I wrought upon myself,

Until I seemed to hear a voice that cried,

To the whole city, "Sleep no more." The trance

Fled with the voice to which it had given birth;

But vainly comments of a calmer mind

Promised soft peace and sweet forgetfulness.

The place, all hushed and silent as it was,

Appeared unfit for the repose of night,

Defenceless as a wood where tigers roam.



﻿With early morning towards the Palace-walk

Of Orleans eagerly I turned; as yet

The streets were still; not so those long Arcades;

There, 'mid a peal of ill-matched sounds and cries,

That greeted me on entering, I could hear

Shrill voices from the hawkers in the throng,

Bawling, "Denunciation of the Crimes

Of Maximilian Robespierre;" the hand,

Prompt as the voice, held forth a printed speech,

The same that had been recently pronounced,

When Robespierre, not ignorant for what mark

Some words of indirect reproof had been

Intended, rose in hardihood, and dared

The man who had an ill surmise of him

To bring his charge in openness; whereat,

When a dead pause ensued, and no one stirred,

In silence of all present, from his seat

Louvet walked single through the avenue,

And took his station in the Tribune, saying,

"I, Robespierre, accuse thee!" Well is known

The inglorious issue of that charge, and how

He, who had launched the startling thunderbolt,

The one bold man, whose voice the attack had sounded,

Was left without a follower to discharge

His perilous duty, and retire lamenting

That Heaven's best aid is wasted upon men

Who to themselves are false.

﻿But these are things

Of which I speak, only as they were storm

Or sunshine to my individual mind,

No further. Let me then relate that now—

In some sort seeing with my proper eyes

That Liberty, and Life, and Death would soon

To the remotest corners of the land

Lie in the arbitrement of those who ruled

The capital City; what was struggled for,

And by what combatants victory must be won;

The indecision on their part whose aim

Seemed best, and the straightforward path of those

Who in attack or in defence were strong

Through their impiety—my inmost soul

Was agitated; yea, I could almost

Have prayed that throughout earth upon all men,

By patient exercise of reason made

Worthy of liberty, all spirits filled

With zeal expanding in Truth's holy light,

The gift of tongues might fall, and power arrive

From the four quarters of the winds to do

For France, what without help she could not do,

A work of honour; think not that to this

I added, work of safety: from all doubt

Or trepidation for the end of things

Far was I, far as angels are from guilt.



﻿Yet did I grieve, nor only grieved, but thought

Of opposition and of remedies:

An insignificant stranger and obscure,

And one, moreover, little graced with power

Of eloquence even in my native speech,

And all unfit for tumult or intrigue,

Yet would I at this time with willing heart

Have undertaken for a cause so great

Service however dangerous. I revolved,

How much the destiny of Man had still

Hung upon single persons; that there was,

Transcendent to all local patrimony,

One nature, as there is one sun in heaven;

That objects, even as they are great, thereby

Do come within the reach of humblest eyes;

That Man is only weak through his mistrust

And want of hope where evidence divine

Proclaims to him that hope should be most sure;

Nor did the inexperience of my youth

Preclude conviction, that a spirit strong

In hope, and trained to noble aspirations,

A spirit throughly faithful to itself,

Is for Society's unreasoning herd

A domineering instinct, serves at once

For way and guide, a fluent receptacle

That gathers up each petty straggling rill

And vein of water, glad to be rolled on

In safe obedience; that a mind, whose rest

Is where it ought to be, in self-restraint,

In circumspection and simplicity,

Falls rarely in entire discomfiture

Below its aim, or meets with, from without,

A treachery that foils it or defeats;

And, lastly, if the means on human will,

Frail human will, dependent should betray

Him who too boldly trusted them, I felt

That 'mid the loud distractions of the world

A sovereign voice subsists within the soul,

Arbiter undisturbed of right and wrong,

Of life and death, in majesty severe

Enjoining, as may best promote the aims

Of truth and justice, either sacrifice,

From whatsoever region of our cares

Or our infirm affections Nature pleads,

Earnest and blind, against the stern decree.



﻿On the other side, I called to mind those truths

That are the common-places of the schools—

(A theme for boys, too hackneyed for their sires,)

Yet, with a revelation's liveliness,

In all their comprehensive bearings known

And visible to philosophers of old,

Men who, to business of the world untrained,

Lived in the shade; and to Harmodius known

And his compeer Aristogiton, known

To Brutus—that tyrannic power is weak,

Hath neither gratitude, nor faith, nor love,

Nor the support of good or evil men

To trust in; that the godhead which is ours

Can never utterly be charmed or stilled;

That nothing hath a natural right to last

But equity and reason; that all else

Meets foes irreconcilable, and at best

Lives only by variety of disease.



﻿Well might my wishes be intense, my thoughts

Strong and perturbed, not doubting at that time

But that the virtue of one paramount mind

Would have abashed those impious crests—have quelled

Outrage and bloody power, and, in despite

Of what the People long had been and were

Through ignorance and false teaching, sadder proof

Of immaturity, and in the teeth

Of desperate opposition from without—

Have cleared a passage for just government,

And left a solid birthright to the State,

Redeemed, according to example given

By ancient lawgivers.

﻿In this frame of mind,

Dragged by a chain of harsh necessity,

So seemed it,—now I thankfully acknowledge,

Forced by the gracious providence of Heaven,—

To England I returned, else (though assured

That I both was and must be of small weight,

No better than a landsman on the deck

Of a ship struggling with a hideous storm)

Doubtless, I should have then made common cause

With some who perished; haply perished too,

A poor mistaken and bewildered offering,—

Should to the breast of Nature have gone back,

With all my resolutions, all my hopes,

A Poet only to myself, to men

Useless, and even, beloved Friend! a soul

To thee unknown!

﻿Twice had the trees let fall

Their leaves, as often Winter had put on

His hoary crown, since I had seen the surge

Beat against Albion's shore, since ear of mine

Had caught the accents of my native speech

Upon our native country's sacred ground.

A patriot of the world, how could I glide

Into communion with her sylvan shades,

Erewhile my tuneful haunt? It pleased me more

To abide in the great City, where I found

The general air still busy with the stir

Of that first memorable onset made

By a strong levy of humanity

Upon the traffickers in Negro blood;

Effort which, though defeated, had recalled

To notice old forgotten principles,

And through the nation spread a novel heat

Of virtuous feeling. For myself, I own

That this particular strife had wanted power

To rivet my affections; nor did now

Its unsuccessful issue much excite

My sorrow; for I brought with me the faith

That, if France prospered, good men would not long

Pay fruitless worship to humanity,

And this most rotten branch of human shame,

Object, so seemed it, of superfluous pains,

Would fall together with its parent tree.

What, then, were my emotions, when in arms

Britain put forth her free-born strength in league,

Oh, pity and shame! with those confederate Powers!

Not in my single self alone I found,

But in the minds of all ingenuous youth,

Change and subversion from that hour. No shock

Given to my moral nature had I known

Down to that very moment; neither lapse

Nor turn of sentiment that might be named

A revolution, save at this one time;

All else was progress on the self-same path

On which, with a diversity of pace,

I had been travelling: this a stride at once

Into another region. As a light

And pliant harebell, swinging in the breeze

On some grey rock—its birth-place—so had I

Wantoned, fast rooted on the ancient tower

Of my beloved country, wishing not

A happier fortune than to wither there:

Now was I from that pleasant station torn

And tossed about in whirlwind. I rejoiced,

Yea, afterwards—truth most painful to record!—

Exulted, in the triumph of my soul,

When Englishmen by thousands were o'erthrown,

Left without glory on the field, or driven,

Brave hearts! to shameful flight. It was a grief,—

Grief call it not, 'twas anything but that,—

A conflict of sensations without name,

Of which he only, who may love the sight

Of a village steeple, as I do, can judge,

When, in the congregation bending all

To their great Father, prayers were offered up,

Or praises for our country's victories;

And, 'mid the simple worshippers, perchance

I only, like an uninvited guest

Whom no one owned, sate silent, shall I add,

Fed on the day of vengeance yet to come.



﻿Oh! much have they to account for, who could tear,

By violence, at one decisive rent,

From the best youth in England their dear pride,

Their joy, in England; this, too, at a time

In which worst losses easily might wean

The best of names, when patriotic love

Did of itself in modesty give way,

Like the Precursor when the Deity

Is come Whose harbinger he was; a time

In which apostasy from ancient faith

Seemed but conversion to a higher creed;

Withal a season dangerous and wild,

A time when sage Experience would have snatched

Flowers out of any hedge-row to compose

A chaplet in contempt of his grey locks.



﻿When the proud fleet that bears the red-cross flag

In that unworthy service was prepared

To mingle, I beheld the vessels lie,

A brood of gallant creatures, on the deep;

I saw them in their rest, a sojourner

Through a whole month of calm and glassy days

In that delightful island which protects

Their place of convocation—there I heard,

Each evening, pacing by the still sea-shore,

A monitory sound that never failed,—

The sunset cannon. While the orb went down

In the tranquillity of nature, came

That voice, ill requiem! seldom heard by me

Without a spirit overcast by dark

Imaginations, sense of woes to come,

Sorrow for human kind, and pain of heart.



﻿In France, the men, who, for their desperate ends,

Had plucked up mercy by the roots, were glad

Of this new enemy. Tyrants, strong before

In wicked pleas, were strong as demons now;

And thus, on every side beset with foes,

The goaded land waxed mad; the crimes of few

Spread into madness of the many; blasts

From hell came sanctified like airs from heaven.

The sternness of the just, the faith of those

Who doubted not that Providence had times

Of vengeful retribution, theirs who throned

The human Understanding paramount

And made of that their God, the hopes of men

Who were content to barter short-lived pangs

For a paradise of ages, the blind rage

Of insolent tempers, the light vanity

Of intermeddlers, steady purposes

Of the suspicious, slips of the indiscreet,

And all the accidents of life were pressed

Into one service, busy with one work.

The Senate stood aghast, her prudence quenched,

Her wisdom stifled, and her justice scared,

Her frenzy only active to extol

Past outrages, and shape the way for new,

Which no one dared to oppose or mitigate.



﻿Domestic carnage now filled the whole year

With feast-days; old men from the chimney-nook,

The maiden from the bosom of her love,

The mother from the cradle of her babe,

The warrior from the field—all perished, all—

Friends, enemies, of all parties, ages, ranks,

Head after head, and never heads enough

For those that bade them fall. They found their joy,

They made it proudly, eager as a child,

(If like desires of innocent little ones

May with such heinous appetites be compared),

Pleased in some open field to exercise

A toy that mimics with revolving wings

The motion of a wind-mill; though the air

Do of itself blow fresh, and make the vanes

Spin in his eyesight, that contents him not,

But, with the plaything at arm's length, he sets

His front against the blast, and runs amain,

That it may whirl the faster.

﻿Amid the depth

Of those enormities, even thinking minds

Forgot, at seasons, whence they had their being;

Forgot that such a sound was ever heard

As Liberty upon earth: yet all beneath

Her innocent authority was wrought,

Nor could have been, without her blessed name.

The illustrious wife of Roland, in the hour

Of her composure, felt that agony,

And gave it vent in her last words. O Friend!

It was a lamentable time for man,

Whether a hope had e'er been his or not;

A woful time for them whose hopes survived

The shock; most woful for those few who still

Were flattered, and had trust in human kind:

They had the deepest feeling of the grief.

Meanwhile the Invaders fared as they deserved:

The Herculean Commonwealth had put forth her arms,

And throttled with an infant godhead's might

The snakes about her cradle; that was well,

And as it should be; yet no cure for them

Whose souls were sick with pain of what would be

Hereafter brought in charge against mankind.

Most melancholy at that time, O Friend!

Were my day-thoughts,—my nights were miserable;

Through months, through years, long after the last beat

Of those atrocities, the hour of sleep

To me came rarely charged with natural gifts,

Such ghastly visions had I of despair

And tyranny, and implements of death;

And innocent victims sinking under fear,

And momentary hope, and worn-out prayer,

Each in his separate cell, or penned in crowds

For sacrifice, and struggling with fond mirth

And levity in dungeons, where the dust

Was laid with tears. Then suddenly the scene

Changed, and the unbroken dream entangled me

In long orations, which I strove to plead

Before unjust tribunals,—with a voice

Labouring, a brain confounded, and a sense,

Death-like, of treacherous desertion, felt

In the last place of refuge—my own soul.



﻿When I began in youth's delightful prime

To yield myself to Nature, when that strong

And holy passion overcame me first,

Nor day nor night, evening or morn, was free

From its oppression. But, O Power Supreme!

Without Whose call this world would cease to breathe,

Who from the fountain of Thy grace dost fill

The veins that branch through every frame of life,

Making man what he is, creature divine,

In single or in social eminence,

Above the rest raised infinite ascents

When reason that enables him to be

Is not sequestered—what a change is here!

How different ritual for this after-worship,

What countenance to promote this second love!

The first was service paid to things which lie

Guarded within the bosom of Thy will.

Therefore to serve was high beatitude;

Tumult was therefore gladness, and the fear

Ennobling, venerable; sleep secure,

And waking thoughts more rich than happiest dreams.



﻿But as the ancient Prophets, borne aloft

In vision, yet constrained by natural laws

With them to take a troubled human heart,

Wanted not consolations, nor a creed

Of reconcilement, then when they denounced,

On towns and cities, wallowing in the abyss

Of their offences, punishment to come;

Or saw, like other men, with bodily eyes,

Before them, in some desolated place,

The wrath consummate and the threat fulfilled;

So, with devout humility be it said,

So, did a portion of that spirit fall

On me uplifted from the vantage-ground

Of pity and sorrow to a state of being

That through the time's exceeding fierceness saw

Glimpses of retribution, terrible,

And in the order of sublime behests:

But, even if that were not, amid the awe

Of unintelligible chastisement,

Not only acquiescences of faith

Survived, but daring sympathies with power,

Motions not treacherous or profane, else why

Within the folds of no ungentle breast

Their dread vibration to this hour prolonged?

Wild blasts of music thus could find their way

Into the midst of turbulent events;

So that worst tempests might be listened to.

Then was the truth received into my heart,

That, under heaviest sorrow earth can bring,

If from the affliction somewhere do not grow

Honour which could not else have been, a faith,

An elevation and a sanctity,

If new strength be not given nor old restored,

The blame is ours, not Nature's. When a taunt

Was taken up by scoffers in their pride,

Saying, "Behold the harvest that we reap

From popular government and equality,"

I clearly saw that neither these nor aught

Of wild belief engrafted on their names

By false philosophy had caused the woe,

But a terrific reservoir of guilt

And ignorance filled up from age to age,

That could no longer hold its loathsome charge,

But burst and spread in deluge through the land.



﻿And as the desert hath green spots, the sea

Small islands scattered amid stormy waves,

So that disastrous period did not want

Bright sprinklings of all human excellence,

To which the silver wands of saints in Heaven

Might point with rapturous joy. Yet not the less,

For those examples in no age surpassed

Of fortitude and energy and love,

And human nature faithful to herself

Under worst trials, was I driven to think

Of the glad times when first I traversed France

A youthful pilgrim; above all reviewed

That eventide, when under windows bright

With happy faces and with garlands hung,

And through a rainbow-arch that spanned the street,

Triumphal pomp for liberty confirmed,

I paced, a dear companion at my side,

The town of Arras, whence with promise high

Issued, on delegation to sustain

Humanity and right, that Robespierre,

He who thereafter, and in how short time!

Wielded the sceptre of the Atheist crew.

When the calamity spread far and wide—

And this same city, that did then appear

To outrun the rest in exultation, groaned

Under the vengeance of her cruel son,

As Lear reproached the winds—I could almost

Have quarrelled with that blameless spectacle

For lingering yet an image in my mind

To mock me under such a strange reverse.

﻿O Friend! few happier moments have been mine

Than that which told the downfall of this Tribe

So dreaded, so abhorred. The day deserves

A separate record. Over the smooth sands

Of Leven's ample estuary lay

My journey, and beneath a genial sun,

With distant prospect among gleams of sky

And clouds, and intermingling mountain tops,

In one inseparable glory clad,

Creatures of one ethereal substance met

In consistory, like a diadem

Or crown of burning seraphs as they sit

In the empyrean. Underneath that pomp

Celestial, lay unseen the pastoral vales

Among whose happy fields I had grown up

From childhood. On the fulgent spectacle,

That neither passed away nor changed, I gazed

Enrapt; but brightest things are wont to draw

Sad opposites out of the inner heart,

As even their pensive influence drew from mine.

How could it otherwise? for not in vain

That very morning had I turned aside

To seek the ground where, 'mid a throng of graves,

An honoured teacher of my youth was laid,

And on the stone were graven by his desire

Lines from the churchyard elegy of Gray.

This faithful guide, speaking from his death-bed,

Added no farewell to his parting counsel,

But said to me, "My head will soon lie low;"

And when I saw the turf that covered him,

After the lapse of full eight years, those words,

With sound of voice and countenance of the Man,

Came back upon me, so that some few tears

Fell from me in my own despite. But now

I thought, still traversing that widespread plain,

With tender pleasure of the verses graven

Upon his tombstone, whispering to myself:

He loved the Poets, and, if now alive,

Would have loved me, as one not destitute

Of promise, nor belying the kind hope

That he had formed, when I, at his command,

Began to spin, with toil, my earliest songs.



﻿As I advanced, all that I saw or felt

Was gentleness and peace. Upon a small

And rocky island near, a fragment stood

(Itself like a sea rock) the low remains

(With shells encrusted, dark with briny weeds)

Of a dilapidated structure, once

A Romish chapel, where the vested priest

Said matins at the hour that suited those

Who crossed the sands with ebb of morning tide.

Not far from that still ruin all the plain

Lay spotted with a variegated crowd

Of vehicles and travellers, horse and foot,

Wading beneath the conduct of their guide

In loose procession through the shallow stream

Of inland waters; the great sea meanwhile

Heaved at safe distance, far retired. I paused,

Longing for skill to paint a scene so bright

And cheerful, but the foremost of the band

As he approached, no salutation given

In the familiar language of the day,

Cried, "Robespierre is dead!"—nor was a doubt,

After strict question, left within my mind

That he and his supporters all were fallen.



﻿Great was my transport, deep my gratitude

To everlasting Justice, by this fiat

Made manifest. "Come now, ye golden times,"

Said I forth-pouring on those open sands

A hymn of triumph: "as the morning comes

From out the bosom of the night, come ye:

Thus far our trust is verified; behold!

They who with clumsy desperation brought

A river of Blood, and preached that nothing else

Could cleanse the Augean stable, by the might

Of their own helper have been swept away;

Their madness stands declared and visible;

Elsewhere will safety now be sought, and earth

March firmly towards righteousness and peace."—

Then schemes I framed more calmly, when and how

The madding factions might be tranquillised,

And how through hardships manifold and long

The glorious renovation would proceed.

Thus interrupted by uneasy bursts

Of exultation, I pursued my way

Along that very shore which I had skimmed

In former days, when—spurring from the Vale

Of Nightshade, and St. Mary's mouldering fane,

And the stone abbot, after circuit made

In wantonness of heart, a joyous band

Of school-boys hastening to their distant home

Along the margin of the moonlight sea—

We beat with thundering hoofs the level sand.





BOOK ELEVENTH.





FRANCE.—(Concluded.)



From that time forth, Authority in France

Put on a milder face; Terror had ceased,

Yet every thing was wanting that might give

Courage to them who looked for good by light

Of rational Experience, for the shoots

And hopeful blossoms of a second spring:

Yet, in me, confidence was unimpaired;

The Senate's language, and the public acts

And measures of the Government, though both

Weak, and of heartless omen, had not power

To daunt me; in the People was my trust:

And, in the virtues which mine eyes had seen,

I knew that wound external could not take

Life from the young Republic; that new foes

Would only follow, in the path of shame,

Their brethren, and her triumphs be in the end

Great, universal, irresistible.

This intuition led me to confound

One victory with another, higher far,—

Triumphs of unambitious peace at home,

And noiseless fortitude. Beholding still

Resistance strong as heretofore, I thought

That what was in degree the same was likewise

The same in quality,—that, as the worse

Of the two spirits then at strife remained

Untired, the better, surely, would preserve

The heart that first had roused him. Youth maintains,

In all conditions of society,

Communion more direct and intimate

With Nature,—hence, ofttimes, with reason too—

Than age or manhood, even. To Nature, then,

Power had reverted: habit, custom, law,

Had left an interregnum's open space

For her to move about in, uncontrolled.

Hence could I see how Babel-like their task,

Who, by the recent deluge stupified,

With their whole souls went culling from the day

Its petty promises, to build a tower

For their own safety; laughed with my compeers

At gravest heads, by enmity to France

Distempered, till they found, in every blast

Forced from the street-disturbing newsman's horn,

For her great cause record or prophecy

Of utter ruin. How might we believe

That wisdom could, in any shape, come near

Men clinging to delusions so insane?

And thus, experience proving that no few

Of our opinions had been just, we took

Like credit to ourselves where less was due,

And thought that other notions were as sound,

Yea, could not but be right, because we saw

That foolish men opposed them.

﻿To a strain

More animated I might here give way,

And tell, since juvenile errors are my theme,

What in those days, through Britain, was performed

To turn all judgments out of their right course;

But this is passion over-near ourselves,

Reality too close and too intense,

And intermixed with something, in my mind,

Of scorn and condemnation personal,

That would profane the sanctity of verse.

Our Shepherds, this say merely, at that time

Acted, or seemed at least to act, like men

Thirsting to make the guardian crook of law

A tool of murder; they who ruled the State,

Though with such awful proof before their eyes

That he, who would sow death, reaps death, or worse,

And can reap nothing better, child-like longed

To imitate, not wise enough to avoid;

Or left (by mere timidity betrayed)

The plain straight road, for one no better chosen

Than if their wish had been to undermine

Justice, and make an end of Liberty.



﻿But from these bitter truths I must return

To my own history. It hath been told

That I was led to take an eager part

In arguments of civil polity,

Abruptly, and indeed before my time:

I had approached, like other youths, the shield

Of human nature from the golden side,

And would have fought, even to the death, to attest

The quality of the metal which I saw.

What there is best in individual man,

Of wise in passion, and sublime in power,

Benevolent in small societies,

And great in large ones, I had oft revolved,

Felt deeply, but not thoroughly understood

By reason: nay, far from it; they were yet,

As cause was given me afterwards to learn,

Not proof against the injuries of the day;

Lodged only at the sanctuary's door,

Not safe within its bosom. Thus prepared,

And with such general insight into evil,

And of the bounds which sever it from good,

As books and common intercourse with life

Must needs have given—to the inexperienced mind,

When the world travels in a beaten road,

Guide faithful as is needed—I began

To meditate with ardour on the rule

And management of nations; what it is

And ought to be; and strove to learn how far

Their power or weakness, wealth or poverty,

Their happiness or misery, depends

Upon their laws, and fashion of the State.



﻿(13) O pleasant exercise of hope and joy!

For mighty were the auxiliars which then stood

Upon our side, us who were strong in love!

Bliss was it in that dawn to be alive,

But to be young was very Heaven! O times,

In which the meagre, stale, forbidding ways

Of custom, law, and statute, took at once

The attraction of a country in romance!

When Reason seemed the most to assert her rights

When most intent on making of herself

A prime enchantress—to assist the work,

Which then was going forward in her name!

Not favoured spots alone, but the whole Earth,

The beauty wore of promise—that which sets

(As at some moments might not be unfelt

Among the bowers of Paradise itself)

The budding rose above the rose full blown.

What temper at the prospect did not wake

To happiness unthought of? The inert

Were roused, and lively natures rapt away!

They who had fed their childhood upon dreams,

The play-fellows of fancy, who had made

All powers of swiftness, subtilty, and strength

Their ministers,—who in lordly wise had stirred

Among the grandest objects of the sense,

And dealt with whatsoever they found there

As if they had within some lurking right

To wield it;—they, too, who of gentle mood

Had watched all gentle motions, and to these

Had fitted their own thoughts, schemers more mild,

And in the region of their peaceful selves;—

Now was it that both found, the meek and lofty

Did both find helpers to their hearts' desire,

And stuff at hand, plastic as they could wish,—

Were called upon to exercise their skill,

Not in Utopia,—subterranean fields,—

Or some secreted island, Heaven knows where!

But in the very world, which is the world

Of all of us,—the place where, in the end,

We find our happiness, or not at all!



﻿Why should I not confess that Earth was then

To me, what an inheritance, new-fallen,

Seems, when the first time visited, to one

Who thither comes to find in it his home?

He walks about and looks upon the spot

With cordial transport, moulds it and remoulds,

And is half pleased with things that are amiss,

'Twill be such joy to see them disappear.



﻿An active partisan, I thus convoked

From every object pleasant circumstance

To suit my ends; I moved among mankind

With genial feelings still predominant;

When erring, erring on the better part,

And in the kinder spirit; placable,

Indulgent, as not uninformed that men

See as they have been taught—Antiquity

Gives rights to error; and aware, no less,

That throwing off oppression must be work

As well of License as of Liberty;

And above all—for this was more than all—

Not caring if the wind did now and then

Blow keen upon an eminence that gave

Prospect so large into futurity;

In brief, a child of Nature, as at first,

Diffusing only those affections wider

That from the cradle had grown up with me,

And losing, in no other way than light

Is lost in light, the weak in the more strong.



﻿In the main outline, such it might be said

Was my condition, till with open war

Britain opposed the liberties of France.

This threw me first out of the pale of love;

Soured and corrupted, upwards to the source,

My sentiments; was not, as hitherto,

A swallowing up of lesser things in great,

But change of them into their contraries;

And thus a way was opened for mistakes

And false conclusions, in degree as gross,

In kind more dangerous. What had been a pride,

Was now a shame; my likings and my loves

Ran in new channels, leaving old ones dry;

And hence a blow that, in maturer age,

Would but have touched the judgment, struck more deep

Into sensations near the heart: meantime,

As from the first, wild theories were afloat,

To whose pretensions, sedulously urged,

I had but lent a careless ear, assured

That time was ready to set all things right,

And that the multitude, so long oppressed,

Would be oppressed no more.

﻿But when events

Brought less encouragement, and unto these

The immediate proof of principles no more

Could be entrusted, while the events themselves,

Worn out in greatness, stripped of novelty,

Less occupied the mind, and sentiments

Could through my understanding's natural growth

No longer keep their ground, by faith maintained

Of inward consciousness, and hope that laid

Her hand upon her object—evidence

Safer, of universal application, such

As could not be impeached, was sought elsewhere.



﻿But now, become oppressors in their turn,

Frenchmen had changed a war of self-defence

For one of conquest, losing sight of all

Which they had struggled for: now mounted up,

Openly in the eye of earth and heaven,

The scale of liberty. I read her doom,

With anger vexed, with disappointment sore,

But not dismayed, nor taking to the shame

Of a false prophet. While resentment rose

Striving to hide, what nought could heal, the wounds

Of mortified presumption, I adhered

More firmly to old tenets, and, to prove

Their temper, strained them more; and thus, in heat

Of contest, did opinions every day

Grow into consequence, till round my mind

They clung, as if they were its life, nay more,

The very being of the immortal soul.



﻿This was the time, when, all things tending fast

To depravation, speculative schemes—

That promised to abstract the hopes of Man

Out of his feelings, to be fixed thenceforth

For ever in a purer element—

Found ready welcome. Tempting region that

For Zeal to enter and refresh herself,

Where passions had the privilege to work,

And never hear the sound of their own names.

But, speaking more in charity, the dream

Flattered the young, pleased with extremes, nor least

With that which makes our Reason's naked self

The object of its fervour. What delight!

How glorious! in self-knowledge and self-rule,

To look through all the frailties of the world,

And, with a resolute mastery shaking off

Infirmities of nature, time, and place,

Build social upon personal Liberty,

Which, to the blind restraints of general laws

Superior, magisterially adopts

One guide, the light of circumstances, flashed

Upon an independent intellect.

Thus expectation rose again; thus hope,

From her first ground expelled, grew proud once more.

Oft, as my thoughts were turned to human kind,

I scorned indifference; but, inflamed with thirst

Of a secure intelligence, and sick

Of other longing, I pursued what seemed

A more exalted nature; wished that Man

Should start out of his earthy, worm-like state,

And spread abroad the wings of Liberty,

Lord of himself, in undisturbed delight—

A noble aspiration! yet I feel

(Sustained by worthier as by wiser thoughts)

The aspiration, nor shall ever cease

To feel it;—but return we to our course.



﻿Enough, 'tis true—could such a plea excuse

Those aberrations—had the clamorous friends

Of ancient Institutions said and done

To bring disgrace upon their very names;

Disgrace, of which, custom and written law,

And sundry moral sentiments as props

Or emanations of those institutes,

Too justly bore a part. A veil had been

Uplifted; why deceive ourselves? in sooth,

'Twas even so; and sorrow for the man

Who either had not eyes wherewith to see,

Or, seeing, had forgotten! A strong shock

Was given to old opinions; all men's minds

Had felt its power, and mine was both let loose,

Let loose and goaded. After what hath been

Already said of patriotic love,

Suffice it here to add, that, somewhat stern

In temperament, withal a happy man,

And therefore bold to look on painful things,

Free likewise of the world, and thence more bold,

I summoned my best skill, and toiled, intent

To anatomise the frame of social life,

Yea, the whole body of society

Searched to its heart. Share with me, Friend! the wish

That some dramatic tale, endued with shapes

Livelier, and flinging out less guarded words

Than suit the work we fashion, might set forth

What then I learned, or think I learned, of truth,

And the errors into which I fell, betrayed

By present objects, and by reasonings false

From their beginnings, inasmuch as drawn

Out of a heart that had been turned aside

From Nature's way by outward accidents,

And which was thus confounded, more and more

Misguided, and misguiding. So I fared,

Dragging all precepts, judgments, maxims, creeds,

Like culprits to the bar; calling the mind,

Suspiciously, to establish in plain day

Her titles and her honours; now believing,

Now disbelieving; endlessly perplexed

With impulse, motive, right and wrong, the ground

Of obligation, what the rule and whence

The sanction; till, demanding formal proof,

And seeking it in every thing, I lost

All feeling of conviction, and, in fine,

Sick, wearied out with contrarieties,

Yielded up moral questions in despair.





﻿This was the crisis of that strong disease,

This the soul's last and lowest ebb; I drooped,

Deeming our blessed reason of least use

Where wanted most: "The lordly attributes

Of will and choice," I bitterly exclaimed,

"What are they but a mockery of a Being

Who hath in no concerns of his a test

Of good and evil; knows not what to fear

Or hope for, what to covet or to shun;

And who, if those could be discerned, would yet

Be little profited, would see, and ask

Where is the obligation to enforce?

And, to acknowledged law rebellious, still,

As selfish passion urged, would act amiss;

The dupe of folly, or the slave of crime."



﻿Depressed, bewildered thus, I did not walk

With scoffers, seeking light and gay revenge

From indiscriminate laughter, nor sate down

In reconcilement with an utter waste

Of intellect; such sloth I could not brook,

(Too well I loved, in that my spring of life,

Pains-taking thoughts, and truth, their dear reward)

But turned to abstract science, and there sought

Work for the reasoning faculty enthroned

Where the disturbances of space and time—

Whether in matters various, properties

Inherent, or from human will and power

Derived—find no admission. Then it was—

Thanks to the bounteous Giver of all good!—

That the beloved Sister in whose sight

Those days were passed, now speaking in a voice

Of sudden admonition—like a brook

That did but cross a lonely road, and now

Is seen, heard, felt, and caught at every turn,

Companion never lost through many a league—

Maintained for me a saving intercourse

With my true self; for, though bedimmed and changed

Much, as it seemed, I was no further changed

Than as a clouded and a waning moon:

She whispered still that brightness would return,

She, in the midst of all, preserved me still

A Poet, made me seek beneath that name,

And that alone, my office upon earth;

And, lastly, as hereafter will be shown,

If willing audience fail not, Nature's self,

By all varieties of human love

Assisted, led me back through opening day

To those sweet counsels between head and heart

Whence grew that genuine knowledge, fraught with peace,

Which, through the later sinkings of this cause,

Hath still upheld me, and upholds me now

In the catastrophe (for so they dream,

And nothing less), when, finally to close

And seal up all the gains of France, a Pope

Is summoned in, to crown an Emperor—

This last opprobrium, when we see a people,

That once looked up in faith, as if to Heaven

For manna, take a lesson from the dog

Returning to his vomit; when the sun

That rose in splendour, was alive, and moved

In exultation with a living pomp

Of clouds—his glory's natural retinue—

Hath dropped all functions by the gods bestowed,

And, turned into a gewgaw, a machine,

Sets like an Opera phantom.

﻿Thus, O Friend!

Through times of honour and through times of shame

Descending, have I faithfully retraced

The perturbations of a youthful mind

Under a long-lived storm of great events—

A story destined for thy ear, who now,

Among the fallen of nations, dost abide

Where Etna, over hill and valley, casts

His shadow stretching towards Syracuse,

The city of Timoleon! Righteous Heaven!

How are the mighty prostrated! They first,

They first of all that breathe should have awaked

When the great voice was heard from out the tombs

Of ancient heroes. If I suffered grief

For ill-requited France, by many deemed

A trifler only in her proudest day;

Have been distressed to think of what she once

Promised, now is; a far more sober cause

Thine eyes must see of sorrow in a land,

To the reanimating influence lost

Of memory, to virtue lost and hope,

Though with the wreck of loftier years bestrewn.



﻿But indignation works where hope is not,

And thou, O Friend! wilt be refreshed. There is

One great society alone on earth:

The noble Living and the noble Dead.



﻿Thine be such converse strong and sanative,

A ladder for thy spirit to reascend

To health and joy and pure contentedness;

To me the grief confined, that thou art gone

From this last spot of earth, where Freedom now

Stands single in her only sanctuary;

A lonely wanderer art gone, by pain

Compelled and sickness, at this latter day,

This sorrowful reverse for all mankind.

I feel for thee, must utter what I feel:

The sympathies erewhile in part discharged,

Gather afresh, and will have vent again:

My own delights do scarcely seem to me

My own delights; the lordly Alps themselves,

Those rosy peaks, from which the Morning looks

Abroad on many nations, are no more

For me that image of pure gladsomeness

Which they were wont to be. Through kindred scenes,

For purpose, at a time, how different!

Thou tak'st thy way, carrying the heart and soul

That Nature gives to Poets, now by thought

Matured, and in the summer of their strength.

Oh! wrap him in your shades, ye giant woods,

On Etna's side; and thou, O flowery field

Of Enna! is there not some nook of thine,

From the first play-time of the infant world

Kept sacred to restorative delight,

When from afar invoked by anxious love?



﻿Child of the mountains, among shepherds reared,

Ere yet familiar with the classic page,

I learnt to dream of Sicily; and lo,

The gloom, that, but a moment past, was deepened

At thy command, at her command gives way;

A pleasant promise, wafted from her shores,

Comes o'er my heart: in fancy I behold

Her seas yet smiling, her once happy vales;

Nor can my tongue give utterance to a name

Of note belonging to that honoured isle,

Philosopher or Bard, Empedocles,

Or Archimedes, pure abstracted soul!

That doth not yield a solace to my grief:

And, Theocritus,(14) so far have some

Prevailed among the powers of heaven and earth,

By their endowments, good or great, that they

Have had, as thou reportest, miracles

Wrought for them in old time: yea, not unmoved,

When thinking on my own beloved friend,

I hear thee tell how bees with honey fed

Divine Comates, by his impious lord

Within a chest imprisoned; how they came

Laden from blooming grove or flowery field,

And fed him there, alive, month after month,

Because the goatherd, blessed man! had lips

Wet with the Muses' nectar.

﻿Thus I soothe

The pensive moments by this calm fire-side,

And find a thousand bounteous images

To cheer the thoughts of those I love, and mine.

Our prayers have been accepted; thou wilt stand

On Etna's summit, above earth and sea,

Triumphant, winning from the invaded heavens

Thoughts without bound, magnificent designs,

Worthy of poets who attuned their harps

In wood or echoing cave, for discipline

Of heroes; or, in reverence to the gods,

'Mid temples, served by sapient priests, and choirs

Of virgins crowned with roses. Not in vain

Those temples, where they in their ruins yet

Survive for inspiration, shall attract

Thy solitary steps: and on the brink

Thou wilt recline of pastoral Arethuse;

Or, if that fountain be in truth no more,

Then, near some other spring, which, by the name

Thou gratulatest, willingly deceived,

I see thee linger a glad votary,

And not a captive pining for his home.





BOOK TWELFTH.





IMAGINATION AND TASTE, HOW IMPAIRED AND RESTORED.



Long time have human ignorance and guilt

Detained us, on what spectacles of woe

Compelled to look, and inwardly oppressed

With sorrow, disappointment, vexing thoughts,

Confusion of the judgment, zeal decayed,

And, lastly, utter loss of hope itself

And things to hope for! Not with these began

Our song, and not with these our song must end.—

Ye motions of delight, that haunt the sides

Of the green hills; ye breezes and soft airs,

Whose subtle intercourse with breathing flowers,

Feelingly watched, might teach Man's haughty race

How without injury to take, to give

Without offence; ye who, as if to show

The wondrous influence of power gently used,

Bend the complying heads of lordly pines,

And, with a touch, shift the stupendous clouds

Through the whole compass of the sky; ye brooks,

Muttering along the stones, a busy noise

By day, a quiet sound in silent night;

Ye waves, that out of the great deep steal forth

In a calm hour to kiss the pebbly shore,

Not mute, and then retire, fearing no storm;

And you, ye groves, whose ministry it is

To interpose the covert of your shades,

Even as a sleep, between the heart of man

And outward troubles, between man himself,

Not seldom, and his own uneasy heart:

Oh! that I had a music and a voice

Harmonious as your own, that I might tell

What ye have done for me. The morning shines,

Nor heedeth Man's perverseness; Spring returns,—

I saw the Spring return, and could rejoice,

In common with the children of her love,

Piping on boughs, or sporting on fresh fields,

Or boldly seeking pleasure nearer heaven

On wings that navigate cerulean skies.

So neither were complacency, nor peace,

Nor tender yearnings, wanting for my good

Through these distracted times; in Nature still

Glorying, I found a counterpoise in her,

Which, when the spirit of evil reached its height,

Maintained for me a secret happiness.



﻿This narrative, my Friend! hath chiefly told

Of intellectual power, fostering love,

Dispensing truth, and, over men and things,

Where reason yet might hesitate, diffusing

Prophetic sympathies of genial faith:

So was I favoured—such my happy lot—

Until that natural graciousness of mind

Gave way to overpressure from the times

And their disastrous issues. What availed,

When spells forbade the voyager to land,

That fragrant notice of a pleasant shore

Wafted, at intervals, from many a bower

Of blissful gratitude and fearless love?

Dare I avow that wish was mine to see,

And hope that future times would surely see,

The man to come, parted, as by a gulph,

From him who had been; that I could no more

Trust the elevation which had made me one

With the great family that still survives

To illuminate the abyss of ages past,

Sage, warrior, patriot, hero; for it seemed

That their best virtues were not free from taint

Of something false and weak, that could not stand

The open eye of Reason. Then I said,

"Go to the Poets, they will speak to thee

More perfectly of purer creatures;—yet

If reason be nobility in man,

Can aught be more ignoble than the man

Whom they delight in, blinded as he is

By prejudice, the miserable slave

Of low ambition or distempered love?"



﻿In such strange passion, if I may once more

Review the past, I warred against myself—

A bigot to a new idolatry—

Like a cowled monk who hath forsworn the world,

Zealously laboured to cut off my heart

From all the sources of her former strength;

And as, by simple waving of a wand,

The wizard instantaneously dissolves

Palace or grove, even so could I unsoul

As readily by syllogistic words

Those mysteries of being which have made,

And shall continue evermore to make,

Of the whole human race one brotherhood.



﻿What wonder, then, if, to a mind so far

Perverted, even the visible Universe

Fell under the dominion of a taste

Less spiritual, with microscopic view

Was scanned, as I had scanned the moral world?



﻿O Soul of Nature! excellent and fair!

That didst rejoice with me, with whom I, too,

Rejoiced through early youth, before the winds

And roaring waters, and in lights and shades

That marched and countermarched about the hills

In glorious apparition, Powers on whom

I daily waited, now all eye and now

All ear; but never long without the heart

Employed, and man's unfolding intellect:

O Soul of Nature! that, by laws divine

Sustained and governed, still dost overflow

With an impassioned life, what feeble ones

Walk on this earth! how feeble have I been

When thou wert in thy strength! Nor this through stroke

Of human suffering, such as justifies

Remissness and inaptitude of mind,

But through presumption; even in pleasure pleased

Unworthily, disliking here, and there

Liking; by rules of mimic art transferred

To things above all art; but more,—for this,

Although a strong infection of the age,

Was never much my habit—giving way

To a comparison of scene with scene,

Bent overmuch on superficial things,

Pampering myself with meagre novelties

Of colour and proportion; to the moods

Of time and season, to the moral power,

The affections and the spirit of the place,

Insensible. Nor only did the love

Of sitting thus in judgment interrupt

My deeper feelings, but another cause,

More subtle and less easily explained,

That almost seems inherent in the creature,

A twofold frame of body and of mind.

I speak in recollection of a time

When the bodily eye, in every stage of life

The most despotic of our senses, gained

Such strength in me as often held my mind

In absolute dominion. Gladly here,

Entering upon abstruser argument,

Could I endeavour to unfold the means

Which Nature studiously employs to thwart

This tyranny, summons all the senses each

To counteract the other, and themselves,

And makes them all, and the objects with which all

Are conversant, subservient in their turn

To the great ends of Liberty and Power.

But leave we this: enough that my delights

(Such as they were) were sought insatiably.

Vivid the transport, vivid though not profound;

I roamed from hill to hill, from rock to rock,

Still craving combinations of new forms,

New pleasure, wider empire for the sight,

Proud of her own endowments, and rejoiced

To lay the inner faculties asleep.

Amid the turns and counterturns, the strife

And various trials of our complex being,

As we grow up, such thraldom of that sense

Seems hard to shun. And yet I knew a maid,

A young enthusiast, who escaped these bonds;

Her eye was not the mistress of her heart;

Far less did rules prescribed by passive taste,

Or barren intermeddling subtleties,

Perplex her mind; but, wise as women are

When genial circumstance hath favoured them,

She welcomed what was given, and craved no more;

Whate'er the scene presented to her view,

That was the best, to that she was attuned

By her benign simplicity of life,

And through a perfect happiness of soul,

Whose variegated feelings were in this

Sisters, that they were each some new delight.

Birds in the bower, and lambs in the green field,

Could they have known her, would have loved; methought

Her very presence such a sweetness breathed,

That flowers, and trees, and even the silent hills,

And every thing she looked on, should have had

An intimation how she bore herself

Towards them and to all creatures. God delights

In such a being; for her common thoughts

Are piety, her life is gratitude.



﻿Even like this maid, before I was called forth

From the retirement of my native hills,

I loved whate'er I saw: nor lightly loved,

But most intensely; never dreamt of aught

More grand, more fair, more exquisitely framed

Than those few nooks to which my happy feet

Were limited. I had not at that time

Lived long enough, nor in the least survived

The first diviner influence of this world,

As it appears to unaccustomed eyes.

Worshipping then among the depth of things,

As piety ordained; could I submit

To measured admiration, or to aught

That should preclude humility and love?

I felt, observed, and pondered; did not judge,

Yea, never thought of judging; with the gift

Of all this glory filled and satisfied.

And afterwards, when through the gorgeous Alps

Roaming, I carried with me the same heart:

In truth, the degradation—howsoe'er

Induced, effect, in whatsoe'er degree,

Of custom that prepares a partial scale

In which the little oft outweighs the great;

Or any other cause that hath been named;

Or lastly, aggravated by the times

And their impassioned sounds, which well might make

The milder minstrelsies of rural scenes

Inaudible—was transient; I had known

Too forcibly, too early in my life,

Visitings of imaginative power

For this to last: I shook the habit off

Entirely and for ever, and again

In Nature's presence stood, as now I stand,

A sensitive being, a creative soul.



﻿There are in our existence spots of time,

That with distinct pre-eminence retain

A renovating virtue, whence, depressed

By false opinion and contentious thought,

Or aught of heavier or more deadly weight,

In trivial occupations, and the round

Of ordinary intercourse, our minds

Are nourished and invisibly repaired;

A virtue, by which pleasure is enhanced,

That penetrates, enables us to mount,

When high, more high, and lifts us up when fallen.

This efficacious spirit chiefly lurks

Among those passages of life that give

Profoundest knowledge to what point, and how,

The mind is lord and master—outward sense

The obedient servant of her will. Such moments

Are scattered everywhere, taking their date

From our first childhood. I remember well,

That once, while yet my inexperienced hand

Could scarcely hold a bridle, with proud hopes

I mounted, and we journeyed towards the hills:

An ancient servant of my father's house

Was with me, my encourager and guide:

We had not travelled long, ere some mischance

Disjoined me from my comrade; and, through fear

Dismounting, down the rough and stony moor

I led my horse, and, stumbling on, at length

Came to a bottom, where in former times

A murderer had been hung in iron chains.

The gibbet-mast had mouldered down, the bones

And iron case were gone; but on the turf,

Hard by, soon after that fell deed was wrought,

Some unknown hand had carved the murderer's name.

The monumental letters were inscribed

In times long past; but still, from year to year,

By superstition of the neighbourhood,

The grass is cleared away, and to this hour

The characters are fresh and visible:

A casual glance had shown them, and I fled,

Faltering and faint, and ignorant of the road:

Then, reascending the bare common, saw

A naked pool that lay beneath the hills,

The beacon on the summit, and, more near,

A girl, who bore a pitcher on her head,

And seemed with difficult steps to force her way

Against the blowing wind. It was, in truth,

An ordinary sight; but I should need

Colours and words that are unknown to man,

To paint the visionary dreariness

Which, while I looked all round for my lost guide,

Invested moorland waste, and naked pool,

The beacon crowning the lone eminence,

The female and her garments vexed and tossed

By the strong wind. When, in the blessed hours

Of early love, the loved one at my side,

I roamed, in daily presence of this scene,

Upon the naked pool and dreary crags,

And on the melancholy beacon, fell

A spirit of pleasure and youth's golden gleam;

And think ye not with radiance more sublime

For these remembrances, and for the power

They had left behind? So feeling comes in aid

Of feeling, and diversity of strength

Attends us, if but once we have been strong.

Oh! mystery of man, from what a depth

Proceed thy honours. I am lost, but see

In simple childhood something of the base

On which thy greatness stands; but this I feel,

That from thyself it comes, that thou must give,

Else never canst receive. The days gone by

Return upon me almost from the dawn

Of life: the hiding-places of man's power

Open; I would approach them, but they close.

I see by glimpses now; when age comes on,

May scarcely see at all; and I would give,

While yet we may, as far as words can give,

Substance and life to what I feel, enshrining,

Such is my hope, the spirit of the Past

For future restoration.—Yet another

Of these memorials:—

﻿One Christmas-time,

On the glad eve of its dear holidays,

Feverish, and tired, and restless, I went forth

Into the fields, impatient for the sight

Of those led palfreys that should bear us home;

My brothers and myself. There rose a crag,

That, from the meeting-point of two highways

Ascending, overlooked them both, far stretched;

Thither, uncertain on which road to fix

My expectation, thither I repaired,

Scout-like, and gained the summit; 'twas a day

Tempestuous, dark, and wild, and on the grass

I sate half-sheltered by a naked wall;

Upon my right hand couched a single sheep,

Upon my left a blasted hawthorn stood;

With those companions at my side, I watched,

Straining my eyes intensely, as the mist

Gave intermitting prospect of the copse

And plain beneath. Ere we to school returned,—

That dreary time,—ere we had been ten days

Sojourners in my father's house, he died,

And I and my three brothers, orphans then,

Followed his body to the grave. The event,

With all the sorrow that it brought, appeared

A chastisement; and when I called to mind

That day so lately past, when from the crag

I looked in such anxiety of hope;

With trite reflections of morality,

Yet in the deepest passion, I bowed low

To God, Who thus corrected my desires;

And, afterwards, the wind and sleety rain,

And all the business of the elements,

The single sheep, and the one blasted tree,

And the bleak music from that old stone wall,

The noise of wood and water, and the mist

That on the line of each of those two roads

Advanced in such indisputable shapes;

All these were kindred spectacles and sounds

To which I oft repaired, and thence would drink,

As at a fountain; and on winter nights,

Down to this very time, when storm and rain

Beat on my roof, or, haply, at noon-day,

While in a grove I walk, whose lofty trees,

Laden with summer's thickest foliage, rock

In a strong wind, some working of the spirit,

Some inward agitations thence are brought,

Whate'er their office, whether to beguile

Thoughts over busy in the course they took,

Or animate an hour of vacant ease.





BOOK THIRTEENTH.





IMAGINATION AND TASTE, HOW IMPAIRED AND RESTORED.—(Concluded.)



From Nature doth emotion come, and moods

Of calmness equally are Nature's gift:

This is her glory; these two attributes

Are sister horns that constitute her strength.

Hence Genius, born to thrive by interchange

Of peace and excitation, finds in her

His best and purest friend; from her receives

That energy by which he seeks the truth,

From her that happy stillness of the mind

Which fits him to receive it when unsought.



﻿Such benefit the humblest intellects

Partake of, each in their degree; 'tis mine

To speak, what I myself have known and felt;

Smooth task! for words find easy way, inspired

By gratitude, and confidence in truth.

Long time in search of knowledge did I range

The field of human life, in heart and mind

Benighted; but, the dawn beginning now

To re-appear, 'twas proved that not in vain

I had been taught to reverence a Power

That is the visible quality and shape

And image of right reason; that matures

Her processes by steadfast laws; gives birth

To no impatient or fallacious hopes,

No heat of passion or excessive zeal,

No vain conceits; provokes to no quick turns

Of self-applauding intellect; but trains

To meekness, and exalts by humble faith;

Holds up before the mind intoxicate

With present objects, and the busy dance

Of things that pass away, a temperate show

Of objects that endure; and by this course

Disposes her, when over-fondly set

On throwing off incumbrances, to seek

In man, and in the frame of social life,

Whate'er there is desirable and good

Of kindred permanence, unchanged in form

And function, or, through strict vicissitude

Of life and death, revolving. Above all

Were re-established now those watchful thoughts

Which, seeing little worthy or sublime

In what the Historian's pen so much delights

To blazon—power and energy detached

From moral purpose—early tutored me

To look with feelings of fraternal love

Upon the unassuming things that hold

A silent station in this beauteous world.



﻿Thus moderated, thus composed, I found

Once more in Man an object of delight,

Of pure imagination, and of love;

And, as the horizon of my mind enlarged,

Again I took the intellectual eye

For my instructor, studious more to see

Great truths, than touch and handle little ones.

Knowledge was given accordingly; my trust

Became more firm in feelings that had stood

The test of such a trial; clearer far

My sense of excellence—of right and wrong:

The promise of the present time retired

Into its true proportion; sanguine schemes,

Ambitious projects, pleased me less; I sought

For present good in life's familiar face,

And built thereon my hopes of good to come.



﻿With settling judgments now of what would last

And what would disappear; prepared to find

Presumption, folly, madness, in the men

Who thrust themselves upon the passive world

As Rulers of the world; to see in these,

Even when the public welfare is their aim,

Plans without thought, or built on theories

Vague and unsound; and having brought the books

Of modern statists to their proper test,

Life, human life, with all its sacred claims

Of sex and age, and heaven-descended rights,

Mortal, or those beyond the reach of death;

And having thus discerned how dire a thing

Is worshipped in that idol proudly named

"The Wealth of Nations," where alone that wealth

Is lodged, and how increased; and having gained

A more judicious knowledge of the worth

And dignity of individual man,

No composition of the brain, but man

Of whom we read, the man whom we behold

With our own eyes—I could not but inquire—

Not with less interest than heretofore,

But greater, though in spirit more subdued—

Why is this glorious creature to be found

One only in ten thousand? What one is,

Why may not millions be? What bars are thrown

By Nature in the way of such a hope?

Our animal appetites and daily wants,

Are these obstructions insurmountable?

If not, then others vanish into air.

"Inspect the basis of the social pile:

Inquire," said I, "how much of mental power

And genuine virtue they possess who live

By bodily toil, labour exceeding far

Their due proportion, under all the weight

Of that injustice which upon ourselves

Ourselves entail." Such estimate to frame

I chiefly looked (what need to look beyond?)

Among the natural abodes of men,

Fields with their rural works; recalled to mind

My earliest notices; with these compared

The observations made in later youth,

And to that day continued.—For, the time

Had never been when throes of mighty Nations

And the world's tumult unto me could yield,

How far soe'er transported and possessed,

Full measure of content; but still I craved

An intermingling of distinct regards

And truths of individual sympathy

Nearer ourselves. Such often might be gleaned

From the great City, else it must have proved

To me a heart-depressing wilderness;

But much was wanting: therefore did I turn

To you, ye pathways, and ye lonely roads;

Sought you enriched with everything I prized,

With human kindnesses and simple joys.



﻿Oh! next to one dear state of bliss, vouchsafed

Alas! to few in this untoward world,

The bliss of walking daily in life's prime

Through field or forest with the maid we love,

While yet our hearts are young, while yet we breathe

Nothing but happiness, in some lone nook,

Deep vale, or any where, the home of both,

From which it would be misery to stir:

Oh! next to such enjoyment of our youth,

In my esteem, next to such dear delight,

Was that of wandering on from day to day

Where I could meditate in peace, and cull

Knowledge that step by step might lead me on

To wisdom; or, as lightsome as a bird

Wafted upon the wind from distant lands,

Sing notes of greeting to strange fields or groves,

Which lacked not voice to welcome me in turn:

And, when that pleasant toil had ceased to please,

Converse with men, where if we meet a face

We almost meet a friend, on naked heaths

With long long ways before, by cottage bench,

Or well-spring where the weary traveller rests.



﻿Who doth not love to follow with his eye

The windings of a public way? the sight,

Familiar object as it is, hath wrought

On my imagination since the morn

Of childhood, when a disappearing line,

One daily present to my eyes, that crossed

The naked summit of a far-off hill

Beyond the limits that my feet had trod,

Was like an invitation into space

Boundless, or guide into eternity.

Yes, something of the grandeur which invests

The mariner who sails the roaring sea

Through storm and darkness, early in my mind

Surrounded, too, the wanderers of the earth;

Grandeur as much, and loveliness far more.

Awed have I been by strolling Bedlamites;

From many other uncouth vagrants (passed

In fear) have walked with quicker step; but why

Take note of this? When I began to enquire,

To watch and question those I met, and speak

Without reserve to them, the lonely roads

Were open schools in which I daily read

With most delight the passions of mankind,

Whether by words, looks, sighs, or tears, revealed;

There saw into the depth of human souls,

Souls that appear to have no depth at all

To careless eyes. And—now convinced at heart

How little those formalities, to which

With overweening trust alone we give

The name of Education, have to do

With real feeling and just sense; how vain

A correspondence with the talking world

Proves to the most; and called to make good search

If man's estate, by doom of Nature yoked

With toil, be therefore yoked with ignorance;

If virtue be indeed so hard to rear,

And intellectual strength so rare a boon—

I prized such walks still more, for there I found

Hope to my hope, and to my pleasure peace

And steadiness, and healing and repose

To every angry passion. There I heard,

From mouths of men obscure and lowly, truths

Replete with honour; sounds in unison

With loftiest promises of good and fair.



There are who think that strong affection, love

Known by whatever name, is falsely deemed

A gift, to use a term which they would use,

Of vulgar nature; that its growth requires

Retirement, leisure, language purified

By manners studied and elaborate;

That whoso feels such passion in its strength

Must live within the very light and air

Of courteous usages refined by art.

True is it, where oppression worse than death

Salutes the being at his birth, where grace

Of culture hath been utterly unknown,

And poverty and labour in excess

From day to day pre-occupy the ground

Of the affections, and to Nature's self

Oppose a deeper nature; there, indeed,

Love cannot be; nor does it thrive with ease

Among the close and overcrowded haunts

Of cities, where the human heart is sick,

And the eye feeds it not, and cannot feed.

—Yes, in those wanderings deeply did I feel

How we mislead each other; above all,

How books mislead us, seeking their reward

From judgments of the wealthy Few, who see

By artificial lights; how they debase

The Many for the pleasure of those Few;

Effeminately level down the truth

To certain general notions, for the sake

Of being understood at once, or else

Through want of better knowledge in the heads

That framed them; flattering self-conceit with words,

That, while they most ambitiously set forth

Extrinsic differences, the outward marks

Whereby society has parted man

From man, neglect the universal heart.



﻿Here, calling up to mind what then I saw,

A youthful traveller, and see daily now

In the familiar circuit of my home,

Here might I pause, and bend in reverence

To Nature, and the power of human minds,

To men as they are men within themselves.

How oft high service is performed within,

When all the external man is rude in show,—

Not like a temple rich with pomp and gold,

But a mere mountain chapel, that protects

Its simple worshippers from sun and shower.

Of these, said I, shall be my song: of these,

If future years mature me for the task,

Will I record the praises, making verse

Deal boldly with substantial things; in truth

And sanctity of passion, speak of these,

That justice may be done, obeisance paid

Where it is due: thus haply shall I teach,

Inspire, through unadulterated ears

Pour rapture, tenderness, and hope,—my theme

No other than the very heart of man,

As found among the best of those who live,

Not unexalted by religious faith,

Nor uninformed by books, good books, though few,

In Nature's presence: thence may I select

Sorrow, that is not sorrow, but delight;

And miserable love, that is not pain

To hear of, for the glory that redounds

Therefrom to human kind, and what we are.

Be mine to follow with no timid step

Where knowledge leads me: it shall be my pride

That I have dared to tread this holy ground,

Speaking no dream, but things oracular;

Matter not lightly to be heard by those

Who to the letter of the outward promise

Do read the invisible soul; by men adroit

In speech, and for communion with the world

Accomplished; minds whose faculties are then

Most active when they are most eloquent,

And elevated most when most admired.

Men may be found of other mould than these,

Who are their own upholders, to themselves

Encouragement, and energy, and will,

Expressing liveliest thoughts in lively words

As native passion dictates. Others, too,

There are among the walks of homely life

Still higher, men for contemplation framed,

Shy, and unpractised in the strife of phrase;

Meek men, whose very souls perhaps would sink

Beneath them, summoned to such intercourse:

Theirs is the language of the heavens, the power,

The thought, the image, and the silent joy:

Words are but under-agents in their souls;

When they are grasping with their greatest strength,

They do not breathe among them: this I speak

In gratitude to God, Who feeds our hearts

For His own service; knoweth, loveth us,

When we are unregarded by the world.



﻿Also, about this time did I receive

Convictions still more strong than heretofore,

Not only that the inner frame is good,

And graciously composed, but that, no less,

Nature for all conditions wants not power

To consecrate, if we have eyes to see,

The outside of her creatures, and to breathe

Grandeur upon the very humblest face

Of human life. I felt that the array

Of act and circumstance, and visible form,

Is mainly to the pleasure of the mind

What passion makes them; that meanwhile the forms

Of Nature have a passion in themselves,

That intermingles with those works of man

To which she summons him; although the works

Be mean, have nothing lofty of their own;

And that the Genius of the Poet hence

May boldly take his way among mankind

Wherever Nature leads; that he hath stood

By Nature's side among the men of old,

And so shall stand for ever. Dearest Friend!

If thou partake the animating faith

That Poets, even as Prophets, each with each

Connected in a mighty scheme of truth,

Have each his own peculiar faculty,

Heaven's gift, a sense that fits him to perceive

Objects unseen before, thou wilt not blame

The humblest of this band who dares to hope

That unto him hath also been vouchsafed

An insight that in some sort he possesses,

A privilege whereby a work of his,

Proceeding from a source of untaught things,

Creative and enduring, may become

A power like one of Nature's. To a hope

Not less ambitious once among the wilds

Of Sarum's Plain, my youthful spirit was raised;

There, as I ranged at will the pastoral downs

Trackless and smooth, or paced the bare white roads

Lengthening in solitude their dreary line,

Time with his retinue of ages fled

Backwards, nor checked his flight until I saw

Our dim ancestral Past in vision clear;

Saw multitudes of men, and, here and there,

A single Briton clothed in wolf-skin vest,

With shield and stone-axe, stride across the wold;

The voice of spears was heard, the rattling spear

Shaken by arms of mighty bone, in strength,

Long mouldered, of barbaric majesty.

I called on Darkness—but before the word

Was uttered, midnight darkness seemed to take

All objects from my sight; and lo! again

The Desert visible by dismal flames;

It is the sacrificial altar, fed

With living men—how deep the groans! the voice

Of those that crowd the giant wicker thrills

The monumental hillocks, and the pomp

Is for both worlds, the living and the dead.

At other moments (for through that wide waste

Three summer days I roamed) where'er the Plain

Was figured o'er with circles, lines, or mounds,

That yet survive, a work, as some divine,

Shaped by the Druids, so to represent

Their knowledge of the heavens, and image forth

The constellations; gently was I charmed

Into a waking dream, a reverie

That, with believing eyes, where'er I turned,

Beheld long-bearded teachers, with white wands

Uplifted, pointing to the starry sky,

Alternately, and plain below, while breath

Of music swayed their motions, and the waste

Rejoiced with them and me in those sweet sounds.



﻿This for the past, and things that may be viewed

Or fancied in the obscurity of years

From monumental hints: and thou, O Friend!

Pleased with some unpremeditated strains

That served those wanderings to beguile, hast said

That then and there my mind had exercised

Upon the vulgar forms of present things,

The actual world of our familiar days,

Yet higher power; had caught from them a tone,

An image, and a character, by books

Not hitherto reflected. Call we this

A partial judgment—and yet why? for then

We were as strangers; and I may not speak

Thus wrongfully of verse, however rude,

Which on thy young imagination, trained

In the great City, broke like light from far.

Moreover, each man's Mind is to herself

Witness and judge; and I remember well

That in life's every-day appearances

I seemed about this time to gain clear sight

Of a new world—a world, too, that was fit

To be transmitted, and to other eyes

Made visible; as ruled by those fixed laws

Whence spiritual dignity originates,

Which do both give it being and maintain

A balance, an ennobling interchange

Of action from without and from within;

The excellence, pure function, and best power

Both of the object seen, and eye that sees.





BOOK FOURTEENTH.





CONCLUSION.



In one of those excursions (may they ne'er

Fade from remembrance!) through the Northern tracts

Of Cambria ranging with a youthful friend,

I left Bethgelert's huts at couching-time,

And westward took my way, to see the sun

Rise from the top of Snowdon. To the door

Of a rude cottage at the mountain's base

We came, and roused the shepherd who attends

The adventurous stranger's steps, a trusty guide;

Then, cheered by short refreshment, sallied forth.



﻿It was a close, warm, breezeless summer night,

Wan, dull, and glaring, with a dripping fog

Low-hung and thick that covered all the sky;

But, undiscouraged, we began to climb

The mountain-side. The mist soon girt us round,

And, after ordinary travellers' talk

With our conductor, pensively we sank

Each into commerce with his private thoughts:

Thus did we breast the ascent, and by myself

Was nothing either seen or heard that checked

Those musings or diverted, save that once

The shepherd's lurcher, who, among the crags,

Had to his joy unearthed a hedgehog, teased

His coiled-up prey with barkings turbulent.

This small adventure, for even such it seemed

In that wild place and at the dead of night,

Being over and forgotten, on we wound

In silence as before. With forehead bent

Earthward, as if in opposition set

Against an enemy, I panted up

With eager pace, and no less eager thoughts.

Thus might we wear a midnight hour away,

Ascending at loose distance each from each,

And I, as chanced, the foremost of the band;

When at my feet the ground appeared to brighten,

And with a step or two seemed brighter still;

Nor was time given to ask or learn the cause,

For instantly a light upon the turf

Fell like a flash, and lo! as I looked up,

The Moon hung naked in a firmament

Of azure without cloud, and at my feet

Rested a silent sea of hoary mist.

A hundred hills their dusky backs upheaved

All over this still ocean; and beyond,

Far, far beyond, the solid vapours stretched,

In headlands, tongues, and promontory shapes,

Into the main Atlantic, that appeared

To dwindle, and give up his majesty,

Usurped upon far as the sight could reach.

Not so the ethereal vault; encroachment none

Was there, nor loss; only the inferior stars

Had disappeared, or shed a fainter light

In the clear presence of the full-orbed Moon,

Who, from her sovereign elevation, gazed

Upon the billowy ocean, as it lay

All meek and silent, save that through a rift—

Not distant from the shore whereon we stood,

A fixed, abysmal, gloomy, breathing-place—

Mounted the roar of waters, torrents, streams

Innumerable, roaring with one voice!

Heard over earth and sea, and, in that hour,

For so it seemed, felt by the starry heavens.



﻿When into air had partially dissolved

That vision, given to spirits of the night

And three chance human wanderers, in calm thought

Reflected, it appeared to me the type

Of a majestic intellect, its acts

And its possessions, what it has and craves,

What in itself it is, and would become.

There I beheld the emblem of a mind

That feeds upon infinity, that broods

Over the dark abyss, intent to hear

Its voices issuing forth to silent light

In one continuous stream; a mind sustained

By recognitions of transcendent power,

In sense conducting to ideal form,

In soul of more than mortal privilege.

One function, above all, of such a mind

Had Nature shadowed there, by putting forth,

'Mid circumstances awful and sublime,

That mutual domination which she loves

To exert upon the face of outward things,

So moulded, joined, abstracted, so endowed

With interchangeable supremacy,

That men, least sensitive, see, hear, perceive,

And cannot choose but feel. The power, which all

Acknowledge when thus moved, which Nature thus

To bodily sense exhibits, is the express

Resemblance of that glorious faculty

That higher minds bear with them as their own.

This is the very spirit in which they deal

With the whole compass of the universe:

They from their native selves can send abroad

Kindred mutations; for themselves create

A like existence; and, whene'er it dawns

Created for them, catch it, or are caught

By its inevitable mastery,

Like angels stopped upon the wing by sound

Of harmony from Heaven's remotest spheres.

Them the enduring and the transient both

Serve to exalt; they build up greatest things

From least suggestions; ever on the watch,

Willing to work and to be wrought upon,

They need not extraordinary calls

To rouse them; in a world of life they live,

By sensible impressions not enthralled,

But by their quickening impulse made more prompt

To hold fit converse with the spiritual world,

And with the generations of mankind

Spread over time, past, present, and to come,

Age after age, till Time shall be no more.

Such minds are truly from the Deity,

For they are Powers; and hence the highest bliss

That flesh can know is theirs—the consciousness

Of Whom they are, habitually infused

Through every image and through every thought,

And all affections by communion raised

From earth to heaven, from human to divine;

Hence endless occupation for the Soul,

Whether discursive or intuitive;

Hence cheerfulness for acts of daily life,

Emotions which best foresight need not fear,

Most worthy then of trust when most intense.

Hence, amid ills that vex and wrongs that crush

Our hearts—if here the words of Holy Writ

May with fit reverence be applied—that peace

Which passeth understanding, that repose

In moral judgments which from this pure source

Must come, or will by man be sought in vain.



﻿Oh! who is he that hath his whole life long

Preserved, enlarged, this freedom in himself?

For this alone is genuine liberty:

Where is the favoured being who hath held

That course unchecked, unerring, and untired,

In one perpetual progress smooth and bright?—

A humbler destiny have we retraced,

And told of lapse and hesitating choice,

And backward wanderings along thorny ways:

Yet—compassed round by mountain solitudes,

Within whose solemn temple I received

My earliest visitations, careless then

Of what was given me; and which now I range,

A meditative, oft a suffering man—

Do I declare—in accents which, from truth

Deriving cheerful confidence, shall blend

Their modulation with these vocal streams—

That, whatsoever falls my better mind,

Revolving with the accidents of life,

May have sustained, that, howsoe'er misled,

Never did I, in quest of right and wrong,

Tamper with conscience from a private aim;

Nor was in any public hope the dupe

Of selfish passions; nor did ever yield

Wilfully to mean cares or low pursuits,

But shrunk with apprehensive jealousy

From every combination which might aid

The tendency, too potent in itself,

Of use and custom to bow down the soul

Under a growing weight of vulgar sense,

And substitute a universe of death

For that which moves with light and life informed,

Actual, divine, and true. To fear and love,

To love as prime and chief, for there fear ends,

Be this ascribed; to early intercourse,

In presence of sublime or beautiful forms,

With the adverse principles of pain and joy—

Evil as one is rashly named by men

Who know not what they speak. By love subsists

All lasting grandeur, by pervading love;

That gone, we are as dust.—Behold the fields

In balmy spring-time full of rising flowers

And joyous creatures; see that pair, the lamb

And the lamb's mother, and their tender ways

Shall touch thee to the heart; thou callest this love,

And not inaptly so, for love it is,

Far as it carries thee. In some green bower

Rest, and be not alone, but have thou there

The One who is thy choice of all the world:

There linger, listening, gazing, with delight

Impassioned, but delight how pitiable!

Unless this love by a still higher love

Be hallowed, love that breathes not without awe;

Love that adores, but on the knees of prayer,

By heaven inspired; that frees from chains the soul,

Lifted, in union with the purest, best,

Of earth-born passions, on the wings of praise

Bearing a tribute to the Almighty's Throne.



﻿This spiritual Love acts not nor can exist

Without Imagination, which, in truth,

Is but another name for absolute power

And clearest insight, amplitude of mind,

And Reason in her most exalted mood.

This faculty hath been the feeding source

Of our long labour: we have traced the stream

From the blind cavern whence is faintly heard

Its natal murmur; followed it to light

And open day; accompanied its course

Among the ways of Nature, for a time

Lost sight of it bewildered and engulphed:

Then given it greeting as it rose once more

In strength, reflecting from its placid breast

The works of man and face of human life;

And lastly, from its progress have we drawn

Faith in life endless, the sustaining thought

Of human Being, Eternity, and God.



﻿Imagination having been our theme,

So also hath that intellectual Love,

For they are each in each, and cannot stand

Dividually.—Here must thou be, O Man!

Power to thyself; no Helper hast thou here;

Here keepest thou in singleness thy state:

No other can divide with thee this work:

No secondary hand can intervene

To fashion this ability; 'tis thine,

The prime and vital principle is thine

In the recesses of thy nature, far

From any reach of outward fellowship,

Else is not thine at all. But joy to him,

Oh, joy to him who here hath sown, hath laid

Here, the foundation of his future years!

For all that friendship, all that love can do,

All that a darling countenance can look

Or dear voice utter, to complete the man,

Perfect him, made imperfect in himself,

All shall be his: and he whose soul hath risen

Up to the height of feeling intellect

Shall want no humbler tenderness; his heart

Be tender as a nursing mother's heart;

Of female softness shall his life be full,

Of humble cares and delicate desires,

Mild interests and gentlest sympathies.



﻿Child of my parents! Sister of my soul!

Thanks in sincerest verse have been elsewhere

Poured out for all the early tenderness

Which I from thee imbibed: and 'tis most true

That later seasons owed to thee no less;

For, spite of thy sweet influence and the touch

Of kindred hands that opened out the springs

Of genial thought in childhood, and in spite

Of all that unassisted I had marked

In life or nature of those charms minute

That win their way into the heart by stealth

(Still to the very going-out of youth),

I too exclusively esteemed that love,

And sought that beauty, which, as Milton sings,

Hath terror in it. Thou didst soften down

This over-sternness; but for thee, dear Friend!

My soul, too reckless of mild grace, had stood

In her original self too confident,

Retained too long a countenance severe;

A rock with torrents roaring, with the clouds

Familiar, and a favourite of the stars:

But thou didst plant its crevices with flowers,

Hang it with shrubs that twinkle in the breeze,

And teach the little birds to build their nests

And warble in its chambers. At a time

When Nature, destined to remain so long

Foremost in my affections, had fallen back

Into a second place, pleased to become

A handmaid to a nobler than herself,

When every day brought with it some new sense

Of exquisite regard for common things,

And all the earth was budding with these gifts

Of more refined humanity, thy breath,

Dear Sister! was a kind of gentler spring

That went before my steps. Thereafter came

One whom with thee friendship had early paired;

She came, no more a phantom to adorn

A moment, but an inmate of the heart,

And yet a spirit, there for me enshrined

To penetrate the lofty and the low;

Even as one essence of pervading light

Shines, in the brightest of ten thousand stars,

And, the meek worm that feeds her lonely lamp

Couched in the dewy grass.

﻿With such a theme,

Coleridge! with this my argument, of thee

Shall I be silent? O capacious Soul!

Placed on this earth to love and understand,

And from thy presence shed the light of love,

Shall I be mute, ere thou be spoken of?

Thy kindred influence to my heart of hearts

Did also find its way. Thus fear relaxed

Her overweening grasp; thus thoughts and things

In the self-haunting spirit learned to take

More rational proportions; mystery,

The incumbent mystery of sense and soul,

Of life and death, time and eternity,

Admitted more habitually a mild

Interposition—a serene delight

In closelier gathering cares, such as become

A human creature, howsoe'er endowed,

Poet, or destined for a humbler name;

And so the deep enthusiastic joy,

The rapture of the hallelujah sent

From all that breathes and is, was chastened, stemmed

And balanced by pathetic truth, by trust

In hopeful reason, leaning on the stay

Of Providence; and in reverence for duty,

Here, if need be, struggling with storms, and there

Strewing in peace life's humblest ground with herbs,

At every season green, sweet at all hours.



﻿And now, O Friend! this history is brought

To its appointed close: the discipline

And consummation of a Poet's mind,

In everything that stood most prominent,

Have faithfully been pictured; we have reached

The time (our guiding object from the first)

When we may, not presumptuously, I hope,

Suppose my powers so far confirmed, and such

My knowledge, as to make me capable

Of building up a Work that shall endure.

Yet much hath been omitted, as need was;

Of books how much! and even of the other wealth

That is collected among woods and fields,

Far more: for Nature's secondary grace

Hath hitherto been barely touched upon,

The charm more superficial that attends

Her works, as they present to Fancy's choice

Apt illustrations of the moral world,

Caught at a glance, or traced with curious pains.



﻿Finally, and above all, O Friend! (I speak

With due regret) how much is overlooked

In human nature and her subtle ways,

As studied first in our own hearts, and then

In life among the passions of mankind,

Varying their composition and their hue,

Where'er we move, under the diverse shapes

That individual character presents

To an attentive eye. For progress meet,

Along this intricate and difficult path,

Whate'er was wanting, something had I gained,

As one of many schoolfellows compelled,

In hardy independence, to stand up

Amid conflicting interests, and the shock

Of various tempers; to endure and note

What was not understood, though known to be;

Among the mysteries of love and hate,

Honour and shame, looking to right and left,

Unchecked by innocence too delicate,

And moral notions too intolerant,

Sympathies too contracted. Hence, when called

To take a station among men, the step

Was easier, the transition more secure,

More profitable also; for, the mind

Learns from such timely exercise to keep

In wholesome separation the two natures,

The one that feels, the other that observes.



﻿Yet one word more of personal concern—

Since I withdrew unwillingly from France,

I led an undomestic wanderer's life,

In London chiefly harboured, whence I roamed,

Tarrying at will in many a pleasant spot

Of rural England's cultivated vales

Or Cambrian solitudes. A youth—(he bore

The name of Calvert—it shall live, if words

Of mine can give it life,) in firm belief

That by endowments not from me withheld

Good might be furthered—in his last decay

By a bequest sufficient for my needs

Enabled me to pause for choice, and walk

At large and unrestrained, nor damped too soon

By mortal cares. Himself no Poet, yet

Far less a common follower of the world,

He deemed that my pursuits and labours lay

Apart from all that leads to wealth, or even

A necessary maintenance insures,

Without some hazard to the finer sense;

He cleared a passage for me, and the stream

Flowed in the bent of Nature.

﻿Having now

Told what best merits mention, further pains

Our present purpose seems not to require,

And I have other tasks. Recall to mind

The mood in which this labour was begun,

O Friend! The termination of my course

Is nearer now, much nearer; yet even then,

In that distraction and intense desire,

I said unto the life which I had lived,

Where art thou? Hear I not a voice from thee

Which 'tis reproach to hear? Anon I rose

As if on wings, and saw beneath me stretched

Vast prospect of the world which I had been

And was; and hence this Song, which like a lark

I have protracted, in the unwearied heavens

Singing, and often with more plaintive voice

To earth attempered and her deep-drawn sighs,

Yet centring all in love, and in the end

All gratulant, if rightly understood.



﻿Whether to me shall be allotted life,

And, with life, power to accomplish aught of worth,

That will be deemed no insufficient plea

For having given the story of myself,

Is all uncertain: but, beloved Friend!

When, looking back, thou seest, in clearer view

Than any liveliest sight of yesterday,

That summer, under whose indulgent skies,

Upon smooth Quantock's airy ridge we roved

Unchecked, or loitered 'mid her sylvan combs,

Thou in bewitching words, with happy heart,

Didst chaunt the vision of that Ancient Man,

The bright-eyed Mariner, and rueful woes

Didst utter of the Lady Christabel;

And I, associate with such labour, steeped

In soft forgetfulness the livelong hours,

Murmuring of him who, joyous hap, was found,

After the perils of his moonlight ride,

Near the loud waterfall; or her who sate

In misery near the miserable Thorn;

When thou dost to that summer turn thy thoughts,

And hast before thee all which then we were,

To thee, in memory of that happiness,

It will be known, by thee at least, my Friend!

Felt, that the history of a Poet's mind

Is labour not unworthy of regard:

To thee the work shall justify itself.



﻿The last and later portions of this gift

Have been prepared, not with the buoyant spirits

That were our daily portion when we first

Together wantoned in wild Poesy,

But, under pressure of a private grief,

Keen and enduring, which the mind and heart,

That in this meditative history

Have been laid open, needs must make me feel

More deeply, yet enable me to bear

More firmly; and a comfort now hath risen

From hope that thou art near, and wilt be soon

Restored to us in renovated health;

When, after the first mingling of our tears,

'Mong other consolations, we may draw

Some pleasure from this offering of my love.



﻿Oh! yet a few short years of useful life,

And all will be complete, thy race be run,

Thy monument of glory will be raised;

Then, though (too weak to tread the ways of truth)

This age fall back to old idolatry,

Though men return to servitude as fast

As the tide ebbs, to ignominy and shame

By nations sink together, we shall still

Find solace—knowing what we have learnt to know,

Rich in true happiness if allowed to be

Faithful alike in forwarding a day

Of firmer trust, joint labourers in the work

(Should Providence such grace to us vouchsafe)

Of their deliverance, surely yet to come.

Prophets of Nature, we to them will speak

A lasting inspiration, sanctified

By reason, blest by faith: what we have loved,

Others will love, and we will teach them how;

Instruct them how the mind of man becomes

A thousand times more beautiful than the earth

On which he dwells, above this frame of things

(Which, 'mid all revolution in the hopes

And fears of men, doth still remain unchanged)

In beauty exalted, as it is itself

Of quality and fabric more divine.


