I thought the king had more affected the Duke of
division of the kingdom, it appears not which of
weighed, that curiosity in neither can make choice
so often blushed to acknowledge him, that now I am
I cannot wish the fault undone, the issue of it
But I have, sir, a son by order of law, some year
world before he was sent for, yet was his mother
fair; there was good sport at his making, and the
I must love you, and sue to know you better.
Sir, I shall study deserving.
He hath been out nine years, and away he shall
Attend the lords of France and Burgundy, Gloucester.
Meantime we shall express our darker purpose.
Give me the map there. Know that we have divided
To shake all cares and business from our age;
Conferring them on younger strengths, while we
And you, our no less loving son of Albany,
We have this hour a constant will to publish
Our daughters' several dowers, that future strife
May be prevented now. The princes, France and Burgundy,
Great rivals in our youngest daughter's love,
Long in our court have made their amorous sojourn,
Since now we will divest us both of rule,
That we our largest bounty may extend
Sir, I love you more than words can wield the matter;
Beyond what can be valued, rich or rare;
A love that makes breath poor, and speech unable;
Beyond all manner of so much I love you.
Of all these bounds, even from this line to this,
Be this perpetual. What says our second daughter,
And prize me at her worth. In my true heart
I find she names my very deed of love;
Myself an enemy to all other joys,
Which the most precious square of sense possesses;
And yet not so; since, I am sure, my love's
To thee and thine hereditary ever
Remain this ample third of our fair kingdom;
No less in space, validity, and pleasure,
Although the last, not least; to whose young love
The vines of France and milk of Burgundy
Unhappy that I am, I cannot heave
According to my bond; nor more nor less.
Lest it may mar your fortunes.
Return those duties back as are right fit,
Why have my sisters husbands, if they say
That lord whose hand must take my plight shall carry
Sure, I shall never marry like my sisters,
For, by the sacred radiance of the sun,
From whom we do exist, and cease to be;
Here I disclaim all my paternal care,
And as a stranger to my heart and me
Hold thee, from this, for ever. The barbarous Scythian,
Or he that makes his generation messes
To gorge his appetite, shall to my bosom
As thou my sometime daughter.
Come not between the dragon and his wrath.
I loved her most, and thought to set my rest
So be my grave my peace, as here I give
Call Burgundy. Cornwall and Albany,
I do invest you jointly with my power,
That troop with majesty. Ourself, by monthly course,
With reservation of an hundred knights,
Make with you by due turns. Only we still retain
The name, and all the additions to a king;
The sway, revenue, execution of the rest,
The bow is bent and drawn, make from the shaft.
Let it fall rather, though the fork invade
When majesty stoops to folly. Reverse thy doom;
Thy youngest daughter does not love thee least;
My life I never held but as a pawn
To wage against thy enemies; nor fear to lose it,
See better, Lear; and let me still remain
                  Now, by Apollo, king,
Kill thy physician, and the fee bestow
Upon thy foul disease. Revoke thy doom;
I'll tell thee thou dost evil.
Since thou hast sought to make us break our vow,
To come between our sentence and our power,
Which nor our nature nor our place can bear,
Our potency made good, take thy reward.
Five days we do allot thee, for provision
To shield thee from diseases of the world;
And on the sixth to turn thy hated back
Freedom lives hence, and banishment is here.
The gods to their dear shelter take thee, maid,
And your large speeches may your deeds approve,
That good effects may spring from words of love.
Thus Kent, O princes, bids you all adieu;
He'll shape his old course in a country new.
Here's France and Burgundy, my noble lord.
We first address towards you, who with this king
Will you require in present dower with her,
When she was dear to us, we did hold her so;
Or all of it, with our displeasure pieced,
She's there, and she is yours.
Will you, with those infirmities she owes,
Election makes not up on such conditions.
Then leave her, sir; for, by the power that made me,
I would not from your love make such a stray,
To avert your liking a more worthier way
That she, that even but now was your best object,
The argument of your praise, balm of your age,
Most best, most dearest, should in this trice of time
Commit a thing so monstrous, to dismantle
Must be of such unnatural degree,
Must be a faith that reason without miracle
If for I want that glib and oily art,
To speak and purpose not; since what I well intend,
It is no vicious blot, murder, or foulness,
But even for want of that for which I am richer,
As I am glad I have not, though not to have it
When it is mingled with regards that stand
Give but that portion which yourself proposed,
I am sorry, then, you have so lost a father
That you must lose a husband.
Since that respects of fortune are his love,
Be it lawful I take up what's cast away.
My love should kindle to inflamed respect.
Have no such daughter, nor shall ever see
That face of hers again. Therefore be gone
Bid farewell to your sisters.
And like a sister am most loath to call
But yet, alas, stood I within his grace,
I would prefer him to a better place.
Be to content your lord, who hath received you
And well are worth the want that you have wanted.
Who cover faults, at last shame them derides.
Sister, it is not a little I have to say of what
That's most certain, and with you; next month with us.
You see how full of changes his age is; the
observation we have made of it hath not been
with what poor judgment he hath now cast her off
The best and soundest of his time hath been but
rash; then must we look to receive from his age,
that infirm and choleric years bring with them.
him as this of Kent's banishment.
between France and him. Pray you, let's hit
such dispositions as he bears, this last
surrender of his will but offend us.
Thou, nature, art my goddess; to thy law
Stand in the plague of custom, and permit
The curiosity of nations to deprive me,
When my dimensions are as well compact,
My mind as generous, and my shape as true,
Who, in the lusty stealth of nature, take
More composition and fierce quality
Than doth, within a dull, stale, tired bed,
Our father's love is to the bastard Edmund
Well, my legitimate, if this letter speed,
And my invention thrive, Edmund the base
if it be nothing, I shall not need spectacles.
and for so much as I have perused, I find it not
I shall offend, either to detain or give it. The
contents, as in part I understand them, are to blame.
I hope, for my brother's justification, he wrote
this but as an essay or taste of my virtue.
the world bitter to the best of our times; keeps
them. I begin to find an idle and fond bondage
in the oppression of aged tyranny; who sways, not
as it hath power, but as it is suffered. Come to
me, that of this I may speak more. If our father
revenue for ever, and live the beloved of your
It was not brought me, my lord; there's the
cunning of it; I found it thrown in at the
If the matter were good, my lord, I durst swear
it were his; but, in respect of that, I would
It is his hand, my lord; but I hope his heart is
maintain it to be fit, that, sons at perfect age,
and fathers declining, the father should be as
ward to the son, and the son manage his revenue.
I do not well know, my lord. If it shall please
you to suspend your indignation against my
brother till you can derive from him better
testimony of his intent, you shall run a certain
course; where, if you violently proceed against
him, mistaking his purpose, it would make a great
heart of his obedience. I dare pawn down my life
for him, that he hath wrote this to feel my
where you shall hear us confer of this, and by an
that without any further delay than this very evening.
To his father, that so tenderly and entirely
myself, to be in a due resolution.
These late eclipses in the sun and moon portend
reason it thus and thus, yet nature finds itself
cities, mutinies; in countries, discord; in
and father. This villain of mine comes under the
falls from bias of nature; there's father against
graves. Find out this villain, Edmund; it shall
lose thee nothing; do it carefully. And the
if we were villains by necessity; fools by
heavenly compulsion; knaves, thieves, and
liars, and adulterers, by an enforced obedience of
planetary influence; and all that we are evil in,
father compounded with my mother under the
dragon's tail; and my nativity was under Ursa
major; so that it follows, I am rough and
lecherous. Tut, I should have been that I am,
And pat he comes like the catastrophe of the old
sigh like Tom o' Bedlam. O, these eclipses do
I am thinking, brother, of a prediction I read
this other day, what should follow these eclipses.
I promise you, the effects he writes of succeed
of cohorts, nuptial breaches, and I know not what.
till some little time hath qualified the heat of
in him, that with the mischief of your person it
Some villain hath done me wrong.
That's my fear. I pray you, have a continent
forbearance till the spied of his rage goes
slower; and, as I say, retire with me to my
if you do stir abroad, go armed.
am no honest man if there be any good meaning
and heard; but faintly, nothing like the image
I do serve you in this business.
Whose nature is so far from doing harms,
By day and night he wrongs me; every hour
He flashes into one gross crime or other,
On every trifle. When he returns from hunting,
If you come slack of former services,
You shall do well; the fault of it I'll answer.
He's coming, madam; I hear him.
Put on what weary negligence you please,
If he dislike it, let him to our sister,
Whose mind and mine, I know, in that are one,
That still would manage those authorities
Old fools are babes again; and must be used
And let his knights have colder looks among you;
I would breed from hence occasions, and I shall,
To hold my very course. Prepare for dinner.
If but as well I other accents borrow,
That can my speech defuse, my good intent
May carry through itself to that full issue
Let me not stay a jot for dinner; go get it ready.
I do profess to be no less than I seem; to serve
that is honest; to converse with him that is wise,
and says little; to fear judgment; to fight when I
cannot choose; and to eat no fish.
If thou be as poor for a subject as he is for a
No, sir; but you have that in your countenance
which I would fain call master.
I can keep honest counsel, ride, run, mar a curious
tale in telling it, and deliver a plain message
qualified in; and the best of me is diligence.
Not so young, sir, to love a woman for singing, nor
worse after dinner, I will not part from thee yet.
Go you, and call my fool hither.
Why came not the slave back to me when I called him.
judgment, your highness is not entertained with that
great abatement of kindness appears as well in the
for my duty cannot be silent when I think your
have perceived a most faint neglect of late; which I
have rather blamed as mine own jealous curiosity
have not seen him this two days.
No more of that; I have noted it well. Go you, and
tell my daughter I would speak with her.
Nor tripped neither, you base football player.
and did the third a blessing against his will; if
myself. There's mine; beg another of thy daughters.
out, when Lady the brach may stand by the fire and stink.
Leave thy drink and thy whore,
Why, no, boy; nothing can be made out of nothing.
This is not altogether fool, my lord.
and ladies too, they will not let me have all fool
to myself; they'll be snatching. Give me an egg,
up the meat, the two crowns of the egg. When thou
like myself in this, let him be whipped that first
Fools had ne'er less wit in a year;
They know not how their wits to wear,
Then they for sudden joy did weep,
have me whipped for lying; and sometimes I am
whipped for holding my peace. I had rather be any
care for her frowning; now thou art an O without a
bids me, though you say nothing. Mum, mum,
He that keeps nor crust nor crum,
Weary of all, shall want some.
But other of your insolent retinue
Do hourly carp and quarrel; breaking forth
I had thought, by making this well known unto you,
To have found a safe redress; but now grow fearful,
By what yourself too late have spoke and done.
That you protect this course, and put it on
By your allowance; which if you should, the fault
Which else were shame, that then necessity
Will call discreet proceeding.
That it's had it head bit off by it young.
I would you would make use of that good wisdom,
These dispositions, that of late transform you
I would learn that; for, by the
marks of sovereignty, knowledge, and reason,
I should be false persuaded I had daughters.
As you are old and reverend, you should be wise.
Here do you keep a hundred knights and squires;
That this our court, infected with their manners,
Make it more like a tavern or a brothel
Than a graced palace. The shame itself doth speak
By her, that else will take the thing she begs,
And the remainder, that shall still depend,
Make servants of their betters.
My train are men of choice and rarest parts,
That all particulars of duty know,
And in the most exact regard support
The worships of their name. O most small fault,
Beat at this gate, that let thy folly in,
My lord, I am guiltless, as I am ignorant
Dry up in her the organs of increase;
Create her child of spleen; that it may live,
Let it stamp wrinkles in her brow of youth;
Turn all her mother's pains and benefits
To laughter and contempt; that she may feel
How sharper than a serpent's tooth it is
Never afflict yourself to know the cause;
But let his disposition have that scope
That thou hast power to shake my manhood thus;
That these hot tears, which break from me perforce,
And cast you, with the waters that you lose,
When she shall hear this of thee, with her nails
That I'll resume the shape which thou dost think
You, sir, more knave than fool, after your master.
A fox, when one has caught her,
Should sure to the slaughter,
Each buzz, each fancy, each complaint, dislike,
Let me still take away the harms I fear,
If she sustain him and his hundred knights
Inform her full of my particular fear;
As may compact it more. Get you gone;
This milky gentleness and course of yours
Though I condemn not, yet, under pardon,
Striving to better, oft we mar what's well.
Go you before to Gloucester with these letters.
Acquaint my daughter no further with any thing you
know than comes from her demand out of the letter.
I will not sleep, my lord, till I have delivered
apple, yet I can tell what I can tell.
what a man cannot smell out, he may spy into.
daughters, and leave his horns without a case.
seven stars are no more than seven is a pretty reason.
for being old before thy time.
O, let me not be mad, not mad, sweet heaven
Shall not be a maid long, unless things be cut shorter.
And you, sir. I have been with your father, and
given him notice that the Duke of Cornwall and Regan
his duchess will be here with him this night.
Nay, I know not. You have heard of the news abroad;
I mean the whispered ones, for they are yet but
You may do, then, in time. Fare you well, sir.
This weaves itself perforce into my business.
My father hath set guard to take my brother;
And I have one thing, of a queasy question,
Intelligence is given where you are hid;
In cunning I must draw my sword upon you
Draw; seem to defend yourself; now quit you well.
Some blood drawn on me would beget opinion.
Here stood he in the dark, his sharp sword out,
Mumbling of wicked charms, conjuring the moon
Spoke, with how manifold and strong a bond
The child was bound to the father; sir, in fine,
To his unnatural purpose, in fell motion,
With his prepared sword, he charges home
By his authority I will proclaim it,
That he which finds him shall deserve our thanks,
Bringing the murderous coward to the stake;
When I dissuaded him from his intent,
Of any trust, virtue, or worth in thee
If they not thought the profits of my death
Were very pregnant and potential spurs
I will send far and near, that all the kingdom
May have the due note of him; and of my land,
Loyal and natural boy, I'll work the means
Which I can call but now, I have heard strange news.
If it be true, all vengeance comes too short
Was he not companion with the riotous knights
Yes, madam, he was of that consort.
To have the expense and waste of his revenues.
I have this present evening from my sister
That if they come to sojourn at my house,
Edmund, I hear that you have shown your father
This hurt you see, striving to apprehend him.
                  Ay, my good lord.
If he be taken, he shall never more
How in my strength you please. For you, Edmund,
Whose virtue and obedience doth this instant
Natures of such deep trust we shall much need;
Occasions, noble Gloucester, of some poise,
Our father he hath writ, so hath our sister,
Of differences, which I least thought it fit
To answer from our home; the several messengers
From hence attend dispatch. Our good old friend,
Lay comforts to your bosom; and bestow
Your needful counsel to our business,
Which craves the instant use.
Your graces are right welcome.
Why, then, I care not for thee.
A knave; a rascal; an eater of broken meats; a
bawd, in way of good service, and art nothing but
the least syllable of thy addition.
Why, what a monstrous fellow art thou, thus to rail
Strike, you slave; stand, rogue, stand; you neat
flesh ye; come on, young master.
The messengers from our sister and the king.
I am scarce in breath, my lord.
not have made him so ill, though he had been but two
lord, if you will give me leave, I will tread this
unbolted villain into mortar, and daub the wall of
Yes, sir; but anger hath a privilege.
That such a slave as this should wear a sword,
Who wears no honesty. Such smiling rogues as these,
That in the natures of their lords rebel;
Bring oil to fire, snow to their colder moods;
With every gale and vary of their masters,
Goose, if I had you upon Sarum plain,
His countenance likes me not.
I have seen better faces in my time
Than stands on any shoulder that I see
Who, having been praised for bluntness, doth affect
A saucy roughness, and constrains the garb
An they will take it, so; if not, he's plain.
That stretch their duties nicely.
Under the allowance of your great aspect,
Whose influence, like the wreath of radiant fire
To go out of my dialect, which you
accent was a plain knave; which for my part
I will not be, though I should win your displeasure
It pleased the king his master very late
And put upon him such a deal of man,
None of these rogues and cowards
You shall do small respect, show too bold malice
Against the grace and person of my master,
There shall he sit till noon.
Why, madam, if I were your father's dog,
Sir, being his knave, I will.
His fault is much, and the good king his master
That he's so slightly valued in his messenger,
My sister may receive it much more worse,
To have her gentleman abused, assaulted,
For following her affairs. Put in his legs.
Whose disposition, all the world well knows,
Some time I shall sleep out, the rest I'll whistle.
Good king, that must approve the common saw,
Approach, thou beacon to this under globe,
That by thy comfortable beams I may
Of my obscured course; and shall find time
From this enormous state, seeking to give
Take vantage, heavy eyes, not to behold
And by the happy hollow of a tree
Escaped the hunt. No port is free; no place,
That guard, and most unusual vigilance,
That ever penury, in contempt of man,
The winds and persecutions of the sky.
The country gives me proof and precedent
Of Bedlam beggars, who, with roaring voices,
And with this horrible object, from low farms,
Sometime with lunatic bans, sometime with prayers,
And not send back my messenger.
The night before there was no purpose in them
by the heads, dogs and bears by the neck, monkeys by
What's he that hath so much thy place mistook
                  It is both he and she;
Resolve me, with all modest haste, which way
                  My lord, when at their home
My duty kneeling, came there a reeking post,
Commanded me to follow, and attend
And meeting here the other messenger,
Being the very fellow that of late
He raised the house with loud and coward cries.
Your son and daughter found this trespass worth
The shame which here it suffers.
Do make their children blind;
Shall see their children kind.
Ne'er turns the key to the poor.
With the earl, sir, here within.
their noses are led by their eyes but blind men; and
there's not a nose among twenty but can smell him
that's stinking. Let go thy hold when a great wheel
runs down a hill, lest it break thy neck with
hill, let him draw thee after. When a wise man
would have none but knaves follow it, since a fool gives it.
That sir which serves and seeks for gain,
Will pack when it begins to rain,
But I will tarry; the fool will stay,
The knave turns fool that runs away;
The images of revolt and flying off.
You know the fiery quality of the duke;
The king would speak with Cornwall; the dear father
Infirmity doth still neglect all office
kindness to his horse, buttered his hay.
I am glad to see your highness.
Regan, I think you are; I know what reason
I would divorce me from thy mother's tomb,
Some other time for that. Beloved Regan,
You less know how to value her desert
I cannot think my sister in the least
As clears her from all blame.
                  O, sir, you are old.
Nature in you stands on the very verge
Better than you yourself. Therefore, I pray you,
That to our sister you do make return;
She hath abated me of half my train;
You nimble lightnings, dart your blinding flames
To grudge my pleasures, to cut off my train,
To bandy hasty words, to scant my sizes,
And in conclusion to oppose the bolt
The offices of nature, bond of childhood,
Effects of courtesy, dues of gratitude;
Thy half o' the kingdom hast thou not forgot,
Dwells in the fickle grace of her he follows.
If you do love old men, if your sweet sway
Allow obedience, if yourselves are old,
Deserved much less advancement.
I pray you, father, being weak, seem so.
If, till the expiration of your month,
You will return and sojourn with my sister,
I am now from home, and out of that provision
Which shall be needful for your entertainment.
To wage against the enmity o' the air;
Our youngest born, I could as well be brought
Persuade me rather to be slave and sumpter
But yet thou art my flesh, my blood, my daughter;
Or rather a disease that's in my flesh,
In my corrupted blood. But I'll not chide thee;
I can be patient; I can stay with Regan,
For your fit welcome. Give ear, sir, to my sister;
For those that mingle reason with your passion
Should many people, under two commands,
Why might not you, my lord, receive attendance
                  And in good time you gave it.
With such a number. What, must I come to you
Stands in some rank of praise.
Thy fifty yet doth double five and twenty,
What need you five and twenty, ten, or five,
To follow in a house where twice so many
Allow not nature more than nature needs,
If only to go warm were gorgeous,
You see me here, you gods, a poor old man,
If it be you that stir these daughters' hearts
Against their father, fool me not so much
The terrors of the earth. You think I'll weep
I have full cause of weeping; but this heart
Shall break into a hundred thousand flaws,
And must needs taste his folly.
For his particular, I'll receive him gladly,
He calls to horse; but will I know not whither.
Do sorely ruffle; for many miles about
The injuries that they themselves procure
He is attended with a desperate train;
And what they may incense him to, being apt
To have his ear abused, wisdom bids fear.
My Regan counsels well; come out o' the storm.
Bids the winds blow the earth into the sea,
That things might change or cease; tears his white hair,
Which the impetuous blasts, with eyeless rage,
Catch in their fury, and make nothing of;
And dare, upon the warrant of my note,
Commend a dear thing to you. There is division,
Which are to France the spies and speculations
Intelligent of our state; what hath been seen,
Or the hard rein which both of them have borne
Against the old kind king; or something deeper,
But, true it is, from France there comes a power
Wise in our negligence, have secret feet
In some of our best ports, and are at point
If on my credit you dare build so far
To make your speed to Dover, you shall find
Some that will thank you, making just report
The king hath cause to plain.
I am a gentleman of blood and breeding;
And, from some knowledge and assurance, offer
For confirmation that I am much more
And she will tell you who your fellow is
Few words, but, to effect, more than all yet;
Another part of the heath. Storm still.
But yet I call you servile ministers,
What he his heart should make
For there was never yet fair woman but she made
No, I will be the pattern of all patience;
Gallow the very wanderers of the dark,
Such sheets of fire, such bursts of horrid thunder,
Such groans of roaring wind and rain, I never
That under covert and convenient seeming
Gracious my lord, hard by here is a hovel;
Which even but now, demanding after you,
The art of our necessities is strange,
That can make vile things precious. Come,
Poor fool and knave, I have one part in my heart
Must make content with his fortunes fit,
True, my good boy. Come, bring us to this hovel.
When priests are more in word than matter;
When brewers mar their malt with water;
When every case in law is right;
No squire in debt, nor no poor knight;
Then shall the realm of Albion
That going shall be used with feet.
This prophecy Merlin shall make; for I live before his time.
dealing. When I desire their leave that I might
pity him, they took from me the use of mine own
house; charged me, on pain of their perpetual
him, nor any way sustain him.
must incline to the king. I will seek him, and
if he ask for me. I am ill, and gone to bed.
Though I die for it, as no less is threatened me,
the king my old master must be relieved. There is
some strange thing toward, Edmund; pray you, be careful.
This courtesy, forbid thee, shall the duke
This seems a fair deserving, and must draw me
The younger rises when the old doth fall.
The tyranny of the open night's too rough
I had rather break mine own. Good my lord, enter.
But if thy flight lay toward the raging sea,
Doth from my senses take all feeling else
Is it not as this mouth should tear this hand
No, I will weep no more. In such a night
O, that way madness lies; let me shun that;
                  Good my lord, enter here.
This tempest will not give me leave to ponder
On things would hurt me more. But I'll go in.
Nay, get thee in. I'll pray, and then I'll sleep.
And show the heavens more just.
Through the sharp hawthorn blows the cold wind.
fiend hath led through fire and through flame, and
that hath laid knives under his pillow, and halters
Now, all the plagues that in the pendulous air
Is it the fashion, that discarded fathers
keep thy word justly; swear not; commit not with
man's sworn spouse; set not thy sweet heart on proud
my hair; wore gloves in my cap; served the lust of
her; swore as many oaths as I spake words, and
ear, bloody of hand; hog in sloth, fox in stealth,
Let not the creaking of shoes nor the rustling of
from lenders' books, and defy the foul fiend.
Why, thou wert better in thy grave than to answer
with thy uncovered body this extremity of the skies.
to swim in. Now a little fire in a wild field were
at curfew, and walks till the first cock; he gives
Poor Tom; that eats the swimming frog, the toad,
the fury of his heart, when the foul fiend rages,
standing pool; who is whipped from tithing to
hath had three suits to his back, six shirts to his
body, horse to ride, and weapon to wear;
But mice and rats, and such small deer,
Have been Tom's food for seven long year.
Our flesh and blood is grown so vile, my lord,
That it doth hate what gets it.
Though their injunction be to bar my doors,
Yet have I ventured to come seek you out,
And bring you where both fire and food is ready.
First let me talk with this philosopher.
Good my lord, take his offer; go into the house.
How to prevent the fiend, and to kill vermin.
Let me ask you one word in private.
Noble philosopher, your company.
                  This way, my lord.
I will keep still with my philosopher.
Good my lord, soothe him; let him take the fellow.
      Child Rowland to the dark tower came,
I smell the blood of a British man.
How, my lord, I may be censured, that nature thus
gives way to loyalty, something fears me to think
I now perceive, it was not altogether your
brother's evil disposition made him seek his death;
How malicious is my fortune, that I must repent to
approves him an intelligent party to the advantages
If the matter of this paper be certain, you have
True or false, it hath made thee earl of
Gloucester. Seek out where thy father is, that he
may be ready for our apprehension.
my course of loyalty, though the conflict be sore
I will lay trust upon thee; and thou shalt find a
A chamber in a farmhouse adjoining the castle.
Here is better than the open air; take it
thankfully. I will piece out the comfort with what
All the power of his wits have given way to his
Nero is an angler in the lake of darkness.
Pray, innocent, and beware the foul fiend.
for he's a mad yeoman that sees his son a gentleman
To have a thousand with red burning spits
The foul fiend bites my back.
It shall be done; I will arraign them straight.
Why she dares not come over to thee.
The foul fiend haunts poor Tom in the voice of a
white herring. Croak not, black angel; I have no
I'll see their trial first. Bring in the evidence.
Thou robed man of justice, take thy place;
Thy sheep shall take no harm.
They'll mar my counterfeiting.
The little dogs and all, Tray, Blanch, and
Be thy mouth or black or white,
Tooth that poisons if it bite;
For, with throwing thus my head,
Dogs leap the hatch, and all are fled.
about her heart. Is there any cause in nature that
You, sir, I entertain for one of my hundred; only I
Now, good my lord, lie here and rest awhile.
Here, sir; but trouble him not, his wits are gone.
And drive towards Dover, friend, where thou shalt meet
With thine, and all that offer to defend him,
And follow me, that will to some provision
Which, if convenience will not allow,
Come, help to bear thy master;
When we our betters see bearing our woes,
We scarcely think our miseries our foes.
When grief hath mates, and bearing fellowship.
How light and portable my pain seems now,
When that which makes me bend makes the king bow,
In thy just proof, repeals and reconciles thee.
Post speedily to my lord your husband; show him
Leave him to my displeasure. Edmund, keep you our
upon your traitorous father are not fit for your
beholding. Advise the duke, where you are going, to
like. Our posts shall be swift and intelligent
Some five or six and thirty of his knights,
Are gone with him towards Dover; where they boast
Get horses for your mistress.
Farewell, sweet lord, and sister.
Go seek the traitor Gloucester,
Pinion him like a thief, bring him before us.
Though well we may not pass upon his life
Without the form of justice, yet our power
Shall do a courtesy to our wrath, which men
And what confederacy have you with the traitors
Which came from one that's of a neutral heart,
I am tied to the stake, and I must stand the course.
Because I would not see thy cruel nails
Pluck out his poor old eyes; nor thy fierce sister
The sea, with such a storm as his bare head
The winged vengeance overtake such children.
Upon these eyes of thine I'll set my foot.
He that will think to live till he be old,
One side will mock another; the other too.
I have served you ever since I was a child;
But better service have I never done you
Who is too good to pity thee.
Go thrust him out at gates, and let him smell
Turn out that eyeless villain; throw this slave
And in the end meet the old course of death,
Women will all turn monsters.
The lowest and most dejected thing of fortune,
The lamentable change is from the best;
The worst returns to laughter. Welcome, then,
But that thy strange mutations make us hate thee,
Old ManO, my good lord, I have been your tenant, and
Thy comforts can do me no good at all;
I have no way, and therefore want no eyes;
Our means secure us, and our mere defects
Prove our commodities. O dear son Edgar,
Might I but live to see thee in my touch,
He has some reason, else he could not beg.
Came then into my mind; and yet my mind
As flies to wanton boys, are we to the gods.
They kill us for their sport.
Bad is the trade that must play fool to sorrow,
And bring some covering for this naked soul,
Do as I bid thee, or rather do thy pleasure;
fiends have been in poor Tom at once; of lust, as
That slaves your ordinance, that will not see
Because he doth not feel, feel your power quickly;
So distribution should undo excess,
There is a cliff, whose high and bending head
Bring me but to the very brim of it,
And I'll repair the misery thou dost bear
Madam, within; but never man so changed.
I told him of the army that was landed;
And of the loyal service of his son,
What most he should dislike seems pleasant to him;
Which tie him to an answer. Our wishes on the way
May prove effects. Back, Edmund, to my brother;
Into my husband's hands. This trusty servant
If you dare venture in your own behalf,
Conceive, and fare thee well.
I have been worth the whistle.
You are not worth the dust which the rude wind
From her material sap, perforce must wither
No more; the text is foolish.
A father, and a gracious aged man,
If that the heavens do not their visible spirits
Humanity must perforce prey on itself,
Who hast not in thy brows an eye discerning
Proper deformity seems not in the fiend
To let these hands obey my blood,
They are apt enough to dislocate and tear
A woman's shape doth shield thee.
Slain by his servant, going to put out
Opposed against the act, bending his sword
But not without that harmful stroke, which since
This letter, madam, craves a speedy answer;
But being widow, and my Gloucester with her,
May all the building in my fancy pluck
And quit the house on purpose, that their punishment
Why the King of France is so suddenly gone back
state, which since his coming forth is thought
of; which imports to the kingdom so much
fear and danger, that his personal return was
Did your letters pierce the queen to any
What guests were in her eyes; which parted thence,
Sorrow would be a rarity most beloved,
The holy water from her heavenly eyes,
The stars above us, govern our conditions;
Else one self mate and mate could not beget
Who sometime, in his better tune, remembers
What we are come about, and by no means
Will yield to see his daughter.
To foreign casualties, gave her dear rights
Well, sir, I'll bring you to our master Lear,
Will in concealment wrap me up awhile;
Lending me this acquaintance. I pray you, go
Darnel, and all the idle weeds that grow
In our sustaining corn. A century send forth;
He that helps him take all my outward worth.
The which he lacks; that to provoke in him,
Will close the eye of anguish.
That wants the means to lead it.
In expectation of them. O dear father,
It is thy business that I go about;
My mourning and important tears hath pitied.
No blown ambition doth our arms incite,
Your sister is the better soldier.
In pity of his misery, to dispatch
I must needs after him, madam, with my letter.
My lady charged my duty in this business.
I know your lady does not love her husband;
To noble Edmund. I know you are of her bosom.
And more convenient is he for my hand
If you do find him, pray you, give him this;
And when your mistress hears thus much from you,
I pray, desire her call her wisdom to her.
If you do chance to hear of that blind traitor,
Why, then, your other senses grow imperfect
The fishermen, that walk upon the beach,
Cannot be heard so high. I'll look no more;
Lest my brain turn, and the deficient sight
Bid me farewell, and let me hear thee going.
Why I do trifle thus with his despair
This world I do renounce, and, in your sights,
If I could bear it longer, and not fall
My snuff and loathed part of nature should
And yet I know not how conceit may rob
The treasury of life, when life itself
                  Away, and let me die.
So many fathom down precipitating,
Ten masts at each make not the altitude
Thy life's a miracle. Speak yet again.
And frustrate his proud will.
This is above all strangeness.
Upon the crown o' the cliff, what thing was that
Were two full moons; he had a thousand noses,
It was some fiend; therefore, thou happy father,
Affliction till it do cry out itself
The safer sense will ne'er accommodate
No, they cannot touch me for coining; I am the
Nature's above art in that respect. There's your
it on a giant. Bring up the brown bills. O, well
me like a dog; and told me I had white hairs in my
too was no good divinity. When the rain came to
wet me once, and the wind to make me chatter; when
the thunder would not peace at my bidding; there I
When I do stare, see how the subject quakes.
Was kinder to his father than my daughters
Whose face between her forks presages snow;
With a more riotous appetite.
Down from the waist they are Centaurs,
But to the girdle do the gods inherit,
There's hell, there's darkness, there's the
Let me wipe it first; it smells of mortality.
love. Read thou this challenge; mark but the
Were all the letters suns, I could not see one.
I would not take this from report; it is,
a heavy case, your purse in a light; yet you see how
Take that of me, my friend, who have the power
If thou wilt weep my fortunes, take my eyes.
When we are born, we cry that we are come
The natural fool of fortune. Use me well;
You shall have ransom. Let me have surgeons;
Why, this would make a man a man of salt,
Ay, and laying autumn's dust.
shall get it with running. Sa, sa, sa, sa.
Who redeems nature from the general curse
Which twain have brought her to.
Stands on the hourly thought.
A most poor man, made tame to fortune's blows;
Who, by the art of known and feeling sorrows,
Am pregnant to good pity. Give me your hand,
I'll lead you to some biding.
That eyeless head of thine was first framed flesh
To raise my fortunes. Thou old unhappy traitor,
Lest that the infection of his fortune take
Like hold on thee. Let go his arm.
Good gentleman, go your gait, and let poor volk
If ever thou wilt thrive, bury my body;
To Edmund earl of Gloucester; seek him out
Sit you down, father; rest you
May be my friends. He's dead; I am only sorry
Their papers, is more lawful.
then am I the prisoner, and his bed my goal; from
A plot upon her virtuous husband's life;
That of thy death and business I can tell.
That I stand up, and have ingenious feeling
And woes by wrong imaginations lose
Come, father, I'll bestow you with a friend.
soft music playing; Gentleman, and others attending.
O thou good Kent, how shall I live and work,
All my reports go with the modest truth;
My boon I make it, that you know me not
We put fresh garments on him.
I doubt not of his temperance.
Thy medicine on my lips; and let this kiss
Repair those violent harms that my two sisters
Had you not been their father, these white flakes
Had challenged pity of them. Was this a face
In the most terrible and nimble stroke
Though he had bit me, should have stood that night
To hovel thee with swine, and rogues forlorn,
Had not concluded all. He wakes; speak to him.
Thou art a soul in bliss; but I am bound
Upon a wheel of fire, that mine own tears
To see another thus. I know not what to say.
I feel this pin prick. Would I were assured
                  O, look upon me, sir,
I am a very foolish fond old man,
I fear I am not in my perfect mind.
Yet I am doubtful for I am mainly ignorant
What place this is; and all the skill I have
Remembers not these garments; nor I know not
Where I did lodge last night. Do not laugh at me;
For, as I am a man, I think this lady
If you have poison for me, I will drink it.
I know you do not love me; for your sisters
You have some cause, they have not.
                  In your own kingdom, sir.
Desire him to go in; trouble him no more
powers of the kingdom approach apace.
Or well or ill, as this day's battle's fought.
Know of the duke if his last purpose hold,
But have you never found my brother's way
Sir, this I hear; the king is come to his daughter,
With others whom the rigor of our state
Forced to cry out. Where I could not be honest,
Not bolds the king, with others, whom, I fear,
Most just and heavy causes make oppose.
With the ancient of war on our proceedings.
I shall attend you presently at your tent.
                  I'll overtake you. Speak.
If you have victory, let the trumpet sound
I can produce a champion that will prove
Your business of the world hath so an end,
And machination ceases. Fortune love you.
Stay till I have read the letter.
When time shall serve, let but the herald cry,
The enemy's in view; draw up your powers.
Here is the guess of their true strength and forces
By diligent discovery; but your haste
To both these sisters have I sworn my love;
Each jealous of the other, as the stung
And hardly shall I carry out my side,
Her husband being alive. Now then we'll use
His countenance for the battle; which being done,
Let her who would be rid of him devise
His speedy taking off. As for the mercy
The battle done, and they within our power,
Shall never see his pardon; for my state
Stands on me to defend, not to debate.
A field between the two camps.
Here, father, take the shadow of this tree
If ever I return to you again,
No farther, sir; a man may rot even here.
Their going hence, even as their coming hither;
Until their greater pleasures first be known
For thee, oppressed king, am I cast down;
When thou dost ask me blessing, I'll kneel down,
And pray, and sing, and tell old tales, and laugh
At gilded butterflies, and hear poor rogues
Talk of court news; and we'll talk with them too,
Who loses and who wins; who's in, who's out;
That ebb and flow by the moon.
He that parts us shall bring a brand from heaven,
And fire us hence like foxes. Wipe thine eyes;
One step I have advanced thee; if thou dost
As this instructs thee, thou dost make thy way
About it; and write happy when thou hast done.
Mark, I say, instantly; and carry it so
We do require them of you, so to use them
As we shall find their merits and our safety
To send the old and miserable king
To some retention and appointed guard;
Whose age has charms in it, whose title more,
To pluck the common bosom on his side,
Which do command them. With him I sent the queen;
My reason all the same; and they are ready
Where you shall hold your session. At this time
And the best quarrels, in the heat, are cursed
I hold you but a subject of this war,
                  That's as we list to grace him.
Bore the commission of my place and person;
The which immediacy may well stand up,
And call itself your brother.
In his own grace he doth exalt himself,
That were the most, if he should husband you.
Lady, I am not well; else I should answer
Take thou my soldiers, prisoners, patrimony;
Witness the world, that I create thee here
Stay yet; hear reason. Edmund, I arrest thee
And I, her husband, contradict your bans.
If you will marry, make your loves to me,
If none appear to prove upon thy head
Trust to thy single virtue; for thy soldiers,
All levied in my name, have in my name
She is not well; convey her to my tent.
the lists of the army will maintain upon Edmund,
supposed Earl of Gloucester, that he is a manifold
traitor, let him appear by the third sound of the
Ask him his purposes, why he appears
Upon this call o' the trumpet.
Yet am I noble as the adversary
That, if my speech offend a noble heart,
False to thy gods, thy brother, and thy father;
To the descent and dust below thy foot,
This sword, this arm, and my best spirits, are bent
In wisdom I should ask thy name;
But, since thy outside looks so fair and warlike,
And that thy tongue some say of breeding breathes,
What safe and nicely I might well delay
Which, for they yet glance by and scarcely bruise,
This sword of mine shall give them instant way,
What you have charged me with, that have I done;
                  Let's exchange charity.
I am no less in blood than thou art, Edmund;
My name is Edgar, and thy father's son.
The gods are just, and of our pleasant vices
The dark and vicious place where thee he got
Let sorrow split my heart, if ever I
By nursing them, my lord. List a brief tale;
The bloody proclamation to escape,
That we the pain of death would hourly die
Met I my father with his bleeding rings,
Not sure, though hoping, of this good success,
This speech of yours hath moved me,
You look as you had something more to say.
If there be more, more woeful, hold it in;
For I am almost ready to dissolve,
To such as love not sorrow; but another,
To amplify too much, would make much more,
Who, having seen me in my worst estate,
This judgment of the heavens, that makes us tremble,
The time will not allow the compliment
Despite of mine own nature. Quickly send,
Be brief in it, to the castle; for my writ
He hath commission from thy wife and me
To lay the blame upon her own despair,
I know when one is dead, and when one lives;
If that her breath will mist or stain the stone,
It is a chance which does redeem all sorrows
Gentle, and low, an excellent thing in woman.
If fortune brag of two she loved and hated,
He's a good fellow, I can tell you that;
That, from your first of difference and decay,
You lords and noble friends, know our intent.
What comfort to this great decay may come
During the life of this old majesty,
Have more than merited. All friends shall taste
The wages of their virtue, and all foes
Why should a dog, a horse, a rat, have life,
That would upon the rack of this tough world
Bear them from hence. Our present business
Friends of my soul, you twain
Rule in this realm, and the gored state sustain.
I have a journey, sir, shortly to go;
My master calls me, I must not say no.
The weight of this sad time we must obey;
Speak what we feel, not what we ought to say.
Shall never see so much, nor live so long.
