time shall serve, there shall be smiles; but that
shall be as it may. I dare not fight; but I will
certain of it; and when I cannot live any longer, I
sleep, and they may have their throats about them at
that time; and some say knives have edges. It must
she will plod. There must be conclusions. Well, I
board a dozen or fourteen gentlewomen that live
honestly by the prick of their needles, but it will
foul with me, Pistol, I will scour you with my
off, I would prick your guts a little, in good
The grave doth gape, and doting death is near;
first stroke, I'll run him up to the hilts, as I am a soldier.
That is the word. I thee defy again.
And from the powdering tub of infamy
Good Bardolph, put thy face between his sheets, and
these days. The king has killed his heart. Good
an thou wilt not, why, then, be enemies with me too.
And liquor likewise will I give to thee,
Boy, bristle thy courage up; for Falstaff he is dead,
a finer end and went away an it had been any
I saw him fumble with the sheets and play with
there was but one way; for his nose was as sharp as
should not think of God; I hoped there was no need
to trouble himself with any such thoughts yet. So
hand into the bed and felt them, and they were as
cold as any stone; then I felt to his knees, and
they were as cold as any stone, and so upward and
By computation and mine host's report.
As you love strokes, so jest with me again.
Do use you for my fool and chat with you,
And make a common of my serious hours.
When the sun shines let foolish gnats make sport,
But creep in crannies when he hides his beams.
If you will jest with me, know my aspect,
And fashion your demeanor to my looks,
long, I must get a sconce for my head and ensconce
it too; or else I shall seek my wit in my shoulders.
Lest it make you choleric and purchase me another
Marry, sir, by a rule as plain as the plain bald
The one, to save the money that he spends in
trimming; the other, that at dinner they should not
You would all this time have proved there is no
But your reason was not substantial, why there is no
Some other mistress hath thy sweet aspects;
I am not Adriana nor thy wife.
That never words were music to thine ear,
That never object pleasing in thine eye,
That never touch well welcome to thy hand,
How comes it now, my husband, O, how comes it,
Am better than thy dear self's better part.
A drop of water in the breaking gulf,
Without addition or diminishing,
How dearly would it touch me to the quick,
And that this body, consecrate to thee,
And hurl the name of husband in my face
For if we too be one and thou play false,
I do digest the poison of thy flesh,
Keep then far league and truce with thy true bed;
As strange unto your town as to your talk;
That he did buffet thee, and, in his blows,
To counterfeit thus grossly with your slave,
Be it my wrong you are from me exempt,
But wrong not that wrong with a more contempt.
Thou art an elm, my husband, I a vine,
Whose weakness, married to thy stronger state,
Usurping ivy, brier, or idle moss;
Who, all for want of pruning, with intrusion
Until I know this sure uncertainty,
If we obey them not, this will ensue,
To put the finger in the eye and weep,
Whilst man and master laugh my woes to scorn.
Say he dines forth, and let no creature enter.
You know since Pentecost the sum is due,
Nor now I had not, but that I am bound
Therefore make present satisfaction,
And in the instant that I met with you
I shall receive the money for the same.
While I go to the goldsmith's house, go thou
For locking me out of my doors by day.
I promised your presence and the chain;
But neither chain nor goldsmith came to me.
How much your chain weighs to the utmost carat,
I pray you, see him presently discharged,
Besides, I have some business in the town.
And with you take the chain and bid my wife
An if I have not, sir, I hope you have;
Both wind and tide stays for this gentleman,
My business cannot brook this dalliance.
Consider how it stands upon my credit.
Well, officer, arrest him at my suit.
Either consent to pay this sum for me
I would not spare my brother in this case,
If he should scorn me so apparently.
I do obey thee till I give thee bail.
That stays but till her owner comes aboard,
The ship is in her trim; the merry wind
I will debate this matter at more leisure
And teach your ears to list me with more heed.
Give her this key, and tell her, in the desk
Tell her I am arrested in the street
