
And by the doom of death end woes and all.
Merchant of Syracuse, plead no more;
The enmity and discord which of late
Sprung from the rancorous outrage of your duke
Who wanting guilders to redeem their lives
Excludes all pity from our threatening looks.
For, since the mortal and intestine jars
To admit no traffic to our adverse towns Nay, more,
His goods confiscate to the duke's dispose,
Unless a thousand marks be levied,
To quit the penalty and to ransom him.
Thy substance, valued at the highest rate,
Cannot amount unto a hundred marks;
Therefore by law thou art condemned to die.
My woes end likewise with the evening sun.
A heavier task could not have been imposed
Yet, that the world may witness that my end
I'll utter what my sorrows give me leave.
Unto a woman, happy but for me,
And by me, had not our hap been bad.
With her I lived in joy; our wealth increased
By prosperous voyages I often made
And the great care of goods at random left
From whom my absence was not six months old
Before herself, almost at fainting under
The pleasing punishment that women bear,
Had made provision for her following me
And soon and safe arrived where I was.
There had she not been long, but she became
A joyful mother of two goodly sons;
And, which was strange, the one so like the other,
I bought and brought up to attend my sons.
But longer did we not retain much hope;
For what obscured light the heavens did grant
Did but convey unto our fearful minds
A doubtful warrant of immediate death;
Which though myself would gladly have embraced,
Weeping before for what she saw must come,
Forced me to seek delays for them and me.
The sailors sought for safety by our boat,
To him one of the other twins was bound,
The children thus disposed, my wife and I,
And floating straight, obedient to the stream,
Was carried towards Corinth, as we thought.
At length the sun, gazing upon the earth,
And by the benefit of his wished light,
Gather the sequel by that went before.
Nay, forward, old man; do not break off so;
For we may pity, though not pardon thee.
O, had the gods done so, I had not now
Which being violently borne upon,
So that, in this unjust divorce of us,
Fortune had left to both of us alike
What to delight in, what to sorrow for.
With lesser weight but not with lesser woe,
Was carried with more speed before the wind;
And in our sight they three were taken up
By fishermen of Corinth, as we thought.
At length, another ship had seized on us;
And, knowing whom it was their hap to save,
Had not their bark been very slow of sail;
And therefore homeward did they bend their course.
To tell sad stories of my own mishaps.
My youngest boy, and yet my eldest care,
At eighteen years became inquisitive
Five summers have I spent in furthest Greece,
Roaming clean through the bounds of Asia,
But here must end the story of my life;
And happy were I in my timely death,
Could all my travels warrant me they live.
Now, trust me, were it not against our laws,
Against my crown, my oath, my dignity,
My soul would sue as advocate for thee.
But, though thou art adjudged to the death
Therefore, merchant, I'll limit thee this day
Beg thou, or borrow, to make up the sum,
But to procrastinate his lifeless end.
Lest that your goods too soon be confiscate.
Is apprehended for arrival here;
And not being able to buy out his life
According to the statute of the town,
There is your money that I had to keep.
Go bear it to the Centaur, where we host,
Till that, I'll view the manners of the town,
Peruse the traders, gaze upon the buildings,
And then return and sleep within mine inn,
For with long travel I am stiff and weary.
Many a man would take you at your word,
And go indeed, having so good a mean.
A trusty villain, sir, that very oft,
When I am dull with care and melancholy,
What, will you walk with me about the town,
Of whom I hope to make much benefit;
I crave your pardon. Soon at five o'clock,
Please you, I'll meet with you upon the mart
My present business calls me from you now.
And wander up and down to view the city.
He that commends me to mine own content
Commends me to the thing I cannot get.
I to the world am like a drop of water
That in the ocean seeks another drop,
Who, falling there to find his fellow forth,
So I, to find a mother and a brother,
In quest of them, unhappy, lose myself.
Here comes the almanac of my true date.
The capon burns, the pig falls from the spit,
She is so hot because the meat is cold;
The meat is cold because you come not home;
You come not home because you have no stomach;
You have no stomach having broke your fast;
The saddler had it, sir; I kept it not.
I from my mistress come to you in post;
If I return, I shall be post indeed,
For she will score your fault upon my pate.
And strike you home without a messenger.
Reserve them till a merrier hour than this.
Come on, sir knave, have done your foolishness,
And tell me how thou hast disposed thy charge.
My charge was but to fetch you from the mart
My mistress and her sister stays for you.
Or I shall break that merry sconce of yours
I have some marks of yours upon my pate,
But not a thousand marks between you both.
If I should pay your worship those again,
She that doth fast till you come home to dinner,
What, wilt thou flout me thus unto my face,
Nay, and you will not, sir, I'll take my heels.
Upon my life, by some device or other
As, nimble jugglers that deceive the eye,
If it prove so, I will be gone the sooner.
I greatly fear my money is not safe.
Perhaps some merchant hath invited him,
And from the mart he's somewhere gone to dinner.
Time is their master, and, when they see time,
Because their business still lies out o' door.
Look, when I serve him so, he takes it ill.
O, know he is the bridle of your will.
There's none but asses will be bridled so.
There's nothing situate under heaven's eye
Men, more divine, the masters of all these,
Lords of the wide world and wild watery seas,
Then let your will attend on their accords.
This servitude makes you to keep unwed.
But, were you wedded, you would bear some sway.
They can be meek that have no other cause.
A wretched soul, bruised with adversity,
We bid be quiet when we hear it cry;
But were we burdened with like weight of pain,
So thou, that hast no unkind mate to grieve thee,
But, if thou live to see like right bereft,
Well, I will marry one day, but to try.
Here comes your man; now is your husband nigh.
Nay, he's at two hands with me, and that my two ears
Nay, he struck so plainly, I could too well feel his
hath great care to please his wife.
When I desired him to come home to dinner,
So that my errand, due unto my tongue,
I thank him, I bare home upon my shoulders;
For, in conclusion, he did beat me there.
Go back again, thou slave, and fetch him home.
For God's sake, send some other messenger.
Back, slave, or I will break thy pate across.
Between you I shall have a holy head.
Am I so round with you as you with me,
If I last in this service, you must case me in leather.
His company must do his minions grace,
Whilst I at home starve for a merry look.
Hath homely age the alluring beauty took
What ruins are in me that can be found,
A sunny look of his would soon repair
But, too unruly deer, he breaks the pale
And feeds from home; poor I am but his stale.
Unfeeling fools can with such wrongs dispense.
Sister, you know he promised me a chain;
Would that alone, alone he would detain,
That others touch, and often touching will
By falsehood and corruption doth it shame.
Since that my beauty cannot please his eye,
I'll weep what's left away, and weeping die.
By computation and mine host's report.
I sent him from the mart. See, here he comes.
As you love strokes, so jest with me again.
Even now, even here, not half an hour since.
I did not see you since you sent me hence,
Home to the Centaur, with the gold you gave me.
Do use you for my fool and chat with you,
And make a common of my serious hours.
When the sun shines let foolish gnats make sport,
But creep in crannies when he hides his beams.
If you will jest with me, know my aspect,
And fashion your demeanor to my looks,
Or I will beat this method in your sconce.
long, I must get a sconce for my head and ensconce
it too; or else I shall seek my wit in my shoulders.
Nothing, sir, but that I am beaten.
For urging it the second time to me.
Was there ever any man thus beaten out of season,
Marry, sir, for this something that you gave me for nothing.
I'll make you amends next, to give you nothing for
No, sir; I think the meat wants that I have.
If it be, sir, I pray you, eat none of it.
Lest it make you choleric and purchase me another
I durst have denied that, before you were so choleric.
Marry, sir, by a rule as plain as the plain bald
There's no time for a man to recover his hair that
Because it is a blessing that he bestows on beasts;
Why, but there's many a man hath more hair than wit.
Not a man of those but he hath the wit to lose his hair.
The one, to save the money that he spends in
trimming; the other, that at dinner they should not
You would all this time have proved there is no
Marry, and did, sir; namely, no time to recover hair
But your reason was not substantial, why there is no
to the world's end will have bald followers.
Some other mistress hath thy sweet aspects;
I am not Adriana nor thy wife.
That never words were music to thine ear,
That never object pleasing in thine eye,
That never touch well welcome to thy hand,
How comes it now, my husband, O, how comes it,
Am better than thy dear self's better part.
A drop of water in the breaking gulf,
Without addition or diminishing,
How dearly would it touch me to the quick,
And that this body, consecrate to thee,
And hurl the name of husband in my face
For if we too be one and thou play false,
I do digest the poison of thy flesh,
Keep then far league and truce with thy true bed;
As strange unto your town as to your talk;
Want wit in all one word to understand.
That he did buffet thee, and, in his blows,
Denied my house for his, me for his wife.
I never spake with her in all my life.
How can she thus then call us by our names,
How ill agrees it with your gravity
To counterfeit thus grossly with your slave,
Be it my wrong you are from me exempt,
But wrong not that wrong with a more contempt.
Thou art an elm, my husband, I a vine,
Whose weakness, married to thy stronger state,
Usurping ivy, brier, or idle moss;
Who, all for want of pruning, with intrusion
Infect thy sap and live on thy confusion.
Until I know this sure uncertainty,
If we obey them not, this will ensue,
They'll suck our breath, or pinch us black and blue.
I think thou art in mind, and so am I.
Nay, master, both in mind and in my shape.
But I should know her as well as she knows me.
Come, come, no longer will I be a fool,
To put the finger in the eye and weep,
Whilst man and master laugh my woes to scorn.
Say he dines forth, and let no creature enter.
And in this mist at all adventures go.
Ay; and let none enter, lest I break your pate.
But here's a villain that would face me down
He met me on the mart, and that I beat him,
And charged him with a thousand marks in gold,
And that I did deny my wife and house.
Say what you will, sir, but I know what I know;
If the skin were parchment, and the blows you gave were ink,
Your own handwriting would tell you what I think.
By the wrongs I suffer and the blows I bear.
You would keep from my heels and beware of an ass.
May answer my good will and your good welcome here.
A table full of welcome make scarce one dainty dish.
And welcome more common; for that's nothing but words.
Small cheer and great welcome makes a merry feast.
But though my cates be mean, take them in good part;
Better cheer may you have, but not with better heart.
Either get thee from the door, or sit down at the hatch.
The one ne'er got me credit, the other mickle blame.
You'll cry for this, minion, if I beat the door down.
In debating which was best, we shall part with neither.
They stand at the door, master; bid them welcome hither.
There is something in the wind, that we cannot get in.
You would say so, master, if your garments were thin.
It would make a man mad as a buck, to be so bought and sold.
A man may break a word with you, sir, and words are but wind,
Ay, and break it in your face, so he break it not behind.
For a fish without a fin, there's a fowl without a feather;
Go get thee gone; fetch me an iron crow.
Herein you war against your reputation
And draw within the compass of suspect
Her sober virtue, years and modesty,
And doubt not, sir, but she will well excuse
Why at this time the doors are made against you.
And let us to the Tiger all to dinner,
And about evening come yourself alone
To know the reason of this strange restraint.
If by strong hand you offer to break in
Now in the stirring passage of the day,
A vulgar comment will be made of it,
And that supposed by the common rout
That may with foul intrusion enter in
And dwell upon your grave when you are dead;
For slander lives upon succession,
For ever housed where it gets possession.
And, in despite of mirth, mean to be merry.
There will we dine. This woman that I mean,
Since mine own doors refuse to entertain me,
I'll knock elsewhere, to see if they'll disdain me.
I'll meet you at that place some hour hence.
Do so. This jest shall cost me some expense.
And may it be that you have quite forgot
If you did wed my sister for her wealth,
Or if you like elsewhere, do it by stealth;
Let not my sister read it in your eye;
Look sweet, be fair, become disloyalty;
Bear a fair presence, though your heart be tainted;
Teach sin the carriage of a holy saint;
Shame hath a bastard fame, well managed;
Ill deeds are doubled with an evil word.
Being compact of credit, that you love us;
Though others have the arm, show us the sleeve;
We in your motion turn and you may move us.
Then, gentle brother, get you in again;
When the sweet breath of flattery conquers strife.
Less in your knowledge and your grace you show not
Than our earth's wonder, more than earth divine.
Teach me, dear creature, how to think and speak;
Transform me then, and to your power I'll yield.
But if that I am I, then well I know
Your weeping sister is no wife of mine,
Nor to her bed no homage do I owe
Far more, far more to you do I decline.
O, train me not, sweet mermaid, with thy note,
And as a bed I'll take them and there lie,
And in that glorious supposition think
Not mad, but mated; how, I do not know.
For gazing on your beams, fair sun, being by.
Gaze where you should, and that will clear your sight.
As good to wink, sweet love, as look on night.
My food, my fortune and my sweet hope's aim,
My sole earth's heaven and my heaven's claim.
All this my sister is, or else should be.
Thou hast no husband yet nor I no wife.
I'll fetch my sister, to get her good will.
I am an ass, I am a woman's man and besides myself.
Marry, sir, besides myself, I am due to a woman; one
that claims me, one that haunts me, one that will have me.
Marry sir, such claim as you would lay to your
being a beast, she would have me; but that she,
A very reverent body; ay, such a one as a man may
but lean luck in the match, and yet is she a
and I know not what use to put her to but to make a
lamp of her and run from her by her own light. I
warrant, her rags and the tallow in them will burn a
she'll burn a week longer than the whole world.
Swart, like my shoe, but her face nothing half so
That's a fault that water will mend.
Nell, sir; but her name and three quarters, that's
an ell and three quarters, will not measure her from
she is spherical, like a globe; I could find out
In her forehead; armed and reverted, making war
whiteness in them; but I guess it stood in her chin,
Faith, I saw it not; but I felt it hot in her breath.
aspect to the hot breath of Spain; who sent whole
Oh, sir, I did not look so low. To conclude, this
privy marks I had about me, as, the mark of my
shoulder, the mole in my neck, the great wart on my
And, I think, if my breast had not been made of
An if the wind blow any way from shore,
If any bark put forth, come to the mart,
Where I will walk till thou return to me.
If every one knows us and we know none,
As from a bear a man would run for life,
So fly I from her that would be my wife.
There's none but witches do inhabit here;
She that doth call me husband, even my soul
Doth for a wife abhor. But her fair sister,
Of such enchanting presence and discourse,
I know it well, sir, lo, here is the chain.
Not once, nor twice, but twenty times you have.
And then receive my money for the chain.
I pray you, sir, receive the money now,
For fear you ne'er see chain nor money more.
But this I think, there's no man is so vain
I see a man here needs not live by shifts,
When in the streets he meets such golden gifts.
If any ship put out, then straight away.
Nor now I had not, but that I am bound
Therefore make present satisfaction,
Or I'll attach you by this officer.
Even just the sum that I do owe to you
And in the instant that I met with you
I shall receive the money for the same.
I will discharge my bond and thank you too.
While I go to the goldsmith's house, go thou
For locking me out of my doors by day.
Buy thou a rope and bring it home to me.
I promised your presence and the chain;
But neither chain nor goldsmith came to me.
How much your chain weighs to the utmost carat,
I pray you, see him presently discharged,
For he is bound to sea and stays but for it.
Besides, I have some business in the town.
And with you take the chain and bid my wife
No; bear it with you, lest I come not time enough.
An if I have not, sir, I hope you have;
Or else you may return without your money.
Both wind and tide stays for this gentleman,
And I, to blame, have held him here too long.
Why, give it to my wife and fetch your money.
Come, come, you know I gave it you even now.
Either send the chain or send me by some token.
If not, I'll leave him to the officer.
The money that you owe me for the chain.
I owe you none till I receive the chain.
You know I gave it you half an hour since.
Consider how it stands upon my credit.
This touches me in reputation.
Either consent to pay this sum for me
Or I attach you by this officer.
Here is thy fee; arrest him, officer,
I would not spare my brother in this case,
If he should scorn me so apparently.
I do obey thee till I give thee bail.
As all the metal in your shop will answer.
To your notorious shame; I doubt it not.
That stays but till her owner comes aboard,
The ship is in her trim; the merry wind
But for their owner, master, and yourself.
Thou drunken slave, I sent thee for a rope;
And told thee to what purpose and what end.
You sent me to the bay, sir, for a bark.
I will debate this matter at more leisure
And teach your ears to list me with more heed.
Give her this key, and tell her, in the desk
Tell her I am arrested in the street
On, officer, to prison till it come.
She is too big, I hope, for me to compass.
First he denied you had in him no right.
He meant he did me none; the more my spite.
Then swore he that he was a stranger here.
And true he swore, though yet forsworn he were.
With words that in an honest suit might move.
First he did praise my beauty, then my speech.
I cannot, nor I will not, hold me still;
My tongue, though not my heart, shall have his will.
He is deformed, crooked, old and sere,
Ah, but I think him better than I say,
And yet would herein others' eyes were worse.
My heart prays for him, though my tongue do curse.
No, he's in Tartar limbo, worse than hell.
A devil in an everlasting garment hath him;
A fiend, a fury, pitiless and rough;
A wolf, nay, worse, a fellow all in buff;
The passages of alleys, creeks and narrow lands;
One that before the judgement carries poor souls to hell.
I know not at whose suit he is arrested well;
That he, unknown to me, should be in debt.
Not on a band, but on a stronger thing;
Time is a very bankrupt, and owes more than he's
If Time be in debt and theft, and a sergeant in the way,
And bring thy master home immediately.
Conceit, my comfort and my injury.
There's not a man I meet but doth salute me
And every one doth call me by my name.
Some tender money to me; some invite me;
Sure, these are but imaginary wiles
And Lapland sorcerers inhabit here.
Master, here's the gold you sent me for. What, have
Not that Adam that kept the Paradise but that Adam
skin that was killed for the Prodigal; he that came
behind you, sir, like an evil angel, and bid you
that, when gentlemen are tired, gives them a sob
his rest to do more exploits with his mace than a
Ay, sir, the sergeant of the band, he that brings
any man to answer it that breaks his band; one that
Well, sir, there rest in your foolery. Is there any
Why, sir, I brought you word an hour since that the
you hindered by the sergeant, to tarry for the hoy
Delay. Here are the angels that you sent for to
The fellow is distract, and so am I;
Nay, she is worse, she is the devil's dam; and here
light is an effect of fire, and fire will burn;
ergo, light wenches will burn. Come not near her.
Marry, he must have a long spoon that must eat with
I conjure thee to leave me and be gone.
Or, for my diamond, the chain you promised,
And I'll be gone, sir, and not trouble you.
A rush, a hair, a drop of blood, a pin,
The devil will shake her chain and fright us with it.
I hope you do not mean to cheat me so.
Else would he never so demean himself.
Both one and other he denies me now.
The reason that I gather he is mad,
Besides this present instance of his rage,
Of his own doors being shut against his entrance.
On purpose shut the doors against his way.
And tell his wife that, being lunatic,
My ring away. This course I fittest choose;
And will not lightly trust the messenger
Here comes my man; I think he brings the money.
Here's that, I warrant you, will pay them all.
Why, sir, I gave the money for the rope.
I'll serve you, sir, five hundred at the rate.
And to that end, sir, I will welcome you.
Nay, rather persuade him to hold his hands.
I would I were senseless, sir, that I might not feel
Thou art sensible in nothing but blows, and so is an
I am an ass, indeed; you may prove it by my long
ears. I have served him from the hour of my
nativity to this instant, and have nothing at his
hands for my service but blows. When I am cold, he
heats me with beating; when I am warm, he cools me
raised with it when I sit; driven out of doors with
it when I go from home; welcomed home with it when
I return; nay, I bear it on my shoulders, as a
beggar wont her brat; and, I think when he hath
Come, go along; my wife is coming yonder.
His incivility confirms no less.
Establish him in his true sense again,
And I will please you what you will demand.
Give me your hand and let me feel your pulse.
There is my hand, and let it feel your ear.
I charge thee, Satan, housed within this man,
To yield possession to my holy prayers
Did this companion with the saffron face
Whilst upon me the guilty doors were shut
O husband, God doth know you dined at home;
Sans fable, she herself reviled you there.
In verity you did; my bones bear witness,
Alas, I sent you money to redeem you,
But surely master, not a rag of money.
And I am witness with her that she did.
They must be bound and laid in some dark room.
I did not, gentle husband, lock thee forth.
And, gentle master, I received no gold;
Dissembling harlot, thou art false in all;
And art confederate with a damned pack
But with these nails I'll pluck out these false eyes
That would behold in me this shameful sport.
He is my prisoner, and you shall not have him.
Go bind this man, for he is frantic too.
Hast thou delight to see a wretched man
The debt he owes will be required of me.
Bear me forthwith unto his creditor,
And, knowing how the debt grows, I will pay it.
Master, I am here entered in bond for you.
Go bear him hence. Sister, go you with me.
He did bespeak a chain for me, but had it not.
Straight after did I meet him with a chain.
It may be so, but I did never see it.
Let's call more help to have them bound again.
I see these witches are afraid of swords.
She that would be your wife now ran from you.
I long that we were safe and sound aboard.
Faith, stay here this night; they will surely do us
the mountain of mad flesh that claims marriage of
me, I could find in my heart to stay here still and
Therefore away, to get our stuff aboard.
But, I protest, he had the chain of me,
Though most dishonestly he doth deny it.
Of very reverend reputation, sir,
Of credit infinite, highly beloved,
His word might bear my wealth at any time.
Good sir, draw near to me, I'll speak to him.
That you would put me to this shame and trouble;
And, not without some scandal to yourself,
With circumstance and oaths so to deny
Beside the charge, the shame, imprisonment,
You have done wrong to this my honest friend,
Who, but for staying on our controversy,
I think I had; I never did deny it.
To walk where any honest man resort.
To fetch my poor distracted husband hence.
Let us come in, that we may bind him fast
And bear him home for his recovery.
I knew he was not in his perfect wits.
This week he hath been heavy, sour, sad,
And much different from the man he was;
But till this afternoon his passion
Ne'er brake into extremity of rage.
A sin prevailing much in youthful men,
Who give their eyes the liberty of gazing.
To none of these, except it be the last;
Namely, some love that drew him oft from home.
As roughly as my modesty would let me.
In bed he slept not for my urging it;
At board he fed not for my urging it;
Alone, it was the subject of my theme;
In company I often glanced it;
Still did I tell him it was vile and bad.
And thereof came it that the man was mad.
Poisons more deadly than a mad dog's tooth.
And therefore comes it that his head is light.
Thereof the raging fire of fever bred;
But moody and dull melancholy,
And at her heels a huge infectious troop
The consequence is then thy jealous fits
Have scared thy husband from the use of wits.
Good people enter and lay hold on him.
No, not a creature enters in my house.
Then let your servants bring my husband forth.
And it shall privilege him from your hands
Till I have brought him to his wits again,
I will attend my husband, be his nurse,
Diet his sickness, for it is my office,
And will have no attorney but myself;
And therefore let me have him home with me.
Be patient; for I will not let him stir
Till I have used the approved means I have,
With wholesome syrups, drugs and holy prayers,
It is a branch and parcel of mine oath,
A charitable duty of my order.
Therefore depart and leave him here with me.
To separate the husband and the wife.
Complain unto the duke of this indignity.
And never rise until my tears and prayers
Have won his grace to come in person hither
Comes this way to the melancholy vale,
The place of death and sorry execution,
Behind the ditches of the abbey here.
Against the laws and statutes of this town,
