And more than carefully it us concerns
Of Brabant and of Orleans, shall make forth,
And you, Prince Dauphin, with all swift dispatch,
To line and new repair our towns of war
With men of courage and with means defendant;
For England his approaches makes as fierce
As waters to the sucking of a gulf.
It fits us then to be as provident
As fear may teach us out of late examples
Left by the fatal and neglected English
For peace itself should not so dull a kingdom,
Though war nor no known quarrel were in question,
As were a war in expectation.
And let us do it with no show of fear;
No, with no more than if we heard that England
Her sceptre so fantastically borne
By a vain, giddy, shallow, humorous youth,
Question your grace the late ambassadors,
With what great state he heard their embassy,
How well supplied with noble counsellors,
How terrible in constant resolution,
Were but the outside of the Roman Brutus,
Covering discretion with a coat of folly;
Which of a weak or niggardly projection
And, princes, look you strongly arm to meet him.
And he is bred out of that bloody strain
Witness our too much memorable shame
When Cressy battle fatally was struck,
Of that black name, Edward, Black Prince of Wales;
Whiles that his mountain sire, on mountain standing,
Mangle the work of nature and deface
The patterns that by God and by French fathers
Had twenty years been made. This is a stem
Of that victorious stock; and let us fear
Most spend their mouths when what they seem to threaten
Runs far before them. Good my sovereign,
Take up the English short, and let them know
He wills you, in the name of God Almighty,
That you divest yourself, and lay apart
To him and to his heirs; namely, the crown
By custom and the ordinance of times
Unto the crown of France. That you may know
Nor from the dust of old oblivion raked,
He sends you this most memorable line,
In every branch truly demonstrative;
And when you find him evenly derived
From his most famed of famous ancestors,
Edward the Third, he bids you then resign
Your crown and kingdom, indirectly held
Therefore in fierce tempest is he coming,
That, if requiring fail, he will compel;
And bids you, in the bowels of the Lord,
Deliver up the crown, and to take mercy
On the poor souls for whom this hungry war
The dead men's blood, the pining maidens groans,
This is his claim, his threatening and my message;
Unless the Dauphin be in presence here,
The mighty sender, doth he prize you at.
Do not, in grant of all demands at large,
Sweeten the bitter mock you sent his majesty,
He'll call you to so hot an answer of it,
Shall chide your trespass and return your mock
It is against my will; for I desire
As matching to his youth and vanity,
And, be assured, you'll find a difference,
As we his subjects have in wonder found,
Between the promise of his greener days
Come here himself to question our delay;
A night is but small breath and little pause
To answer matters of this consequence.
The tyranny of the open night's too rough
But if thy flight lay toward the raging sea,
Doth from my senses take all feeling else
Is it not as this mouth should tear this hand
No, I will weep no more. In such a night
O, that way madness lies; let me shun that;
This tempest will not give me leave to ponder
Through the sharp hawthorn blows the cold wind.
fiend hath led through fire and through flame, and
that hath laid knives under his pillow, and halters
Is it the fashion, that discarded fathers
keep thy word justly; swear not; commit not with
man's sworn spouse; set not thy sweet heart on proud
my hair; wore gloves in my cap; served the lust of
her; swore as many oaths as I spake words, and
ear, bloody of hand; hog in sloth, fox in stealth,
Let not the creaking of shoes nor the rustling of
from lenders' books, and defy the foul fiend.
with thy uncovered body this extremity of the skies.
to swim in. Now a little fire in a wild field were
at curfew, and walks till the first cock; he gives
the fury of his heart, when the foul fiend rages,
standing pool; who is whipped from tithing to
hath had three suits to his back, six shirts to his
body, horse to ride, and weapon to wear;
But mice and rats, and such small deer,
Have been Tom's food for seven long year.
Though their injunction be to bar my doors,
Yet have I ventured to come seek you out,
I smell the blood of a British man.
