How heavy do I journey on the way,
Doth teach that ease and that repose to say
The beast that bears me, tired with my woe,
The bloody spur cannot provoke him on
That sometimes anger thrusts into his hide;
Which heavily he answers with a groan,
More sharp to me than spurring to his side;
For that same groan doth put this in my mind;
My grief lies onward and my joy behind.
Till I return, of posting is no need.
O, what excuse will my poor beast then find,
Then should I spur, though mounted on the wind;
Then can no horse with my desire keep pace;
But love, for love, thus shall excuse my jade;
Towards thee I'll run, and give him leave to go.
So am I as the rich, whose blessed key
The which he will not every hour survey,
For blunting the fine point of seldom pleasure.
Therefore are feasts so solemn and so rare,
Since, seldom coming, in the long year set,
Like stones of worth they thinly placed are,
So is the time that keeps you as my chest,
Or as the wardrobe which the robe doth hide,
To make some special instant special blest,
Blessed are you, whose worthiness gives scope,
Since every one hath, every one, one shade,
And you, but one, can every shadow lend.
Is poorly imitated after you;
On Helen's cheek all art of beauty set,
The one doth shadow of your beauty show,
The other as your bounty doth appear;
And you in every blessed shape we know.
In all external grace you have some part,
But you like none, none you, for constant heart.
The rose looks fair, but fairer we it deem
As the perfumed tincture of the roses,
Hang on such thorns and play as wantonly
But, for their virtue only is their show,
Die to themselves. Sweet roses do not so;
When that shall fade, my verse distills your truth.
Not marble, nor the gilded monuments
Of princes, shall outlive this powerful rhyme;
But you shall shine more bright in these contents
When wasteful war shall statues overturn,
Nor Mars his sword nor war's quick fire shall burn
The living record of your memory.
Shall you pace forth; your praise shall still find room
Even in the eyes of all posterity
That wear this world out to the ending doom.
So, till the judgment that yourself arise,
You live in this, and dwell in lover's eyes.
Sweet love, renew thy force; be it not said
Thy edge should blunter be than appetite,
Thy hungry eyes even till they wink with fullness,
The spirit of love with a perpetual dullness.
Let this sad interim like the ocean be
Which parts the shore, where two contracted new
Come daily to the banks, that, when they see
Return of love, more blest may be the view;
Else call it winter, which being full of care
Being your slave, what should I do but tend
I have no precious time at all to spend,
Nor services to do, till you require.
Whilst I, my sovereign, watch the clock for you,
Nor think the bitterness of absence sour
When you have bid your servant once adieu;
Nor dare I question with my jealous thought
Where you may be, or your affairs suppose,
Save, where you are how happy you make those.
So true a fool is love that in your will,
Though you do any thing, he thinks no ill.
That god forbid that made me first your slave,
I should in thought control your times of pleasure,
Or at your hand the account of hours to crave,
O, let me suffer, being at your beck,
Without accusing you of injury.
Be where you list, your charter is so strong
That you yourself may privilege your time
To what you will; to you it doth belong
I am to wait, though waiting so be hell;
Not blame your pleasure, be it ill or well.
If there be nothing new, but that which is
Hath been before, how are our brains beguiled,
O, that record could with a backward look,
Even of five hundred courses of the sun,
Show me your image in some antique book,
That I might see what the old world could say
To this composed wonder of your frame;
Whether we are mended, or whether better they,
Or whether revolution be the same.
O, sure I am, the wits of former days
To subjects worse have given admiring praise.
So do our minutes hasten to their end;
Each changing place with that which goes before,
In sequent toil all forwards do contend.
Nativity, once in the main of light,
And Time that gave doth now his gift confound.
Time doth transfix the flourish set on youth
Feeds on the rarities of nature's truth,
And yet to times in hope my verse shall stand,
