But thou, contracted to thine own bright eyes,
Making a famine where abundance lies,
Thou that art now the world's fresh ornament
And only herald to the gaudy spring,
To eat the world's due, by the grave and thee.
Thy youth's proud livery, so gazed on now,
Where all the treasure of thy lusty days,
This were to be new made when thou art old,
Now is the time that face should form another;
Or who is he so fond will be the tomb
Thou art thy mother's glass, and she in thee
So thou through windows of thine age shall see
Despite of wrinkles this thy golden time.
Die single, and thine image dies with thee.
Nature's bequest gives nothing but doth lend,
And being frank she lends to those are free.
Then how, when nature calls thee to be gone,
Those hours, that with gentle work did frame
The lovely gaze where every eye doth dwell,
Will play the tyrants to the very same
To hideous winter and confounds him there;
Then, were not summer's distillation left,
A liquid prisoner pent in walls of glass,
Leese but their show; their substance still lives sweet.
Then let not winter's ragged hand deface
Make sweet some vial; treasure thou some place
That use is not forbidden usury,
Or ten times happier, be it ten for one;
To be death's conquest and make worms thine heir.
Lifts up his burning head, each under eye
Serving with looks his sacred majesty;
Resembling strong youth in his middle age,
yet mortal looks adore his beauty still,
Attending on his golden pilgrimage;
Sweets with sweets war not, joy delights in joy.
By unions married, do offend thine ear,
They do but sweetly chide thee, who confounds
Mark how one string, sweet husband to another,
Strikes each in each by mutual ordering,
Resembling sire and child and happy mother
Whose speechless song, being many, seeming one,
Is it for fear to wet a widow's eye
The world will be thy widow and still weep
That thou no form of thee hast left behind,
When every private widow well may keep
By children's eyes her husband's shape in mind.
Shifts but his place, for still the world enjoys it;
And kept unused, the user so destroys it.
No love toward others in that bosom sits
That on himself such murderous shame commits.
Grant, if thou wilt, thou art beloved of many,
Which to repair should be thy chief desire.
Be, as thy presence is, gracious and kind,
Make thee another self, for love of me,
That beauty still may live in thine or thee.
If all were minded so, the times should cease
Let those whom Nature hath not made for store,
She carved thee for her seal, and meant thereby
When I do count the clock that tells the time,
And see the brave day sunk in hideous night;
When I behold the violet past prime,
When lofty trees I see barren of leaves
Then of thy beauty do I question make,
That thou among the wastes of time must go,
Since sweets and beauties do themselves forsake
And die as fast as they see others grow;
Save breed, to brave him when he takes thee hence.
Against this coming end you should prepare,
And your sweet semblance to some other give.
So should that beauty which you hold in lease
When your sweet issue your sweet form should bear.
Who lets so fair a house fall to decay,
Against the stormy gusts of winter's day
Not from the stars do I my judgment pluck;
But not to tell of good or evil luck,
Nor can I fortune to brief minutes tell,
Pointing to each his thunder, rain and wind,
Or say with princes if it shall go well,
But from thine eyes my knowledge I derive,
And, constant stars, in them I read such art
As truth and beauty shall together thrive,
When I consider every thing that grows
Holds in perfection but a little moment,
When I perceive that men as plants increase,
And wear their brave state out of memory;
Sets you most rich in youth before my sight,
To change your day of youth to sullied night;
And all in war with Time for love of you,
And fortify yourself in your decay
Now stand you on the top of happy hours,
And many maiden gardens yet unset
With virtuous wish would bear your living flowers,
So should the lines of life that life repair,
Which this, Time's pencil, or my pupil pen,
Neither in inward worth nor outward fair,
Can make you live yourself in eyes of men.
To give away yourself keeps yourself still,
And you must live, drawn by your own sweet skill.
Who will believe my verse in time to come,
Though yet, heaven knows, it is but as a tomb
Which hides your life and shows not half your parts.
If I could write the beauty of your eyes
And in fresh numbers number all your graces,
But were some child of yours alive that time,
You should live twice; in it and in my rhyme.
Rough winds do shake the darling buds of May,
Sometime too hot the eye of heaven shines,
And every fair from fair sometime declines,
But thy eternal summer shall not fade
So long as men can breathe or eyes can see,
So long lives this and this gives life to thee.
Devouring Time, blunt thou the lion's paws,
And make the earth devour her own sweet brood;
Pluck the keen teeth from the fierce tiger's jaws,
Make glad and sorry seasons as thou fleets,
To the wide world and all her fading sweets;
O, carve not with thy hours my love's fair brow,
Nor draw no lines there with thine antique pen;
Him in thy course untainted do allow
My love shall in my verse ever live young.
A woman's face with Nature's own hand painted
A woman's gentle heart, but not acquainted
With shifting change, as is false women's fashion;
An eye more bright than theirs, less false in rolling,
And for a woman wert thou first created;
And by addition me of thee defeated,
By adding one thing to my purpose nothing.
Mine be thy love and thy love's use their treasure.
So is it not with me as with that Muse
Who heaven itself for ornament doth use
And every fair with his fair doth rehearse
With sun and moon, with earth and sea's rich gems,
O' let me, true in love, but truly write,
And then believe me, my love is as fair
As any mother's child, though not so bright
Let them say more than like of hearsay well;
I will not praise that purpose not to sell.
My glass shall not persuade me I am old,
So long as youth and thou are of one date;
Then look I death my days should expiate.
For all that beauty that doth cover thee
As I, not for myself, but for thee will;
Bearing thy heart, which I will keep so chary
As tender nurse her babe from faring ill.
Presume not on thy heart when mine is slain;
Who with his fear is put besides his part,
Or some fierce thing replete with too much rage,
So I, for fear of trust, forget to say
The perfect ceremony of love's rite,
And in mine own love's strength seem to decay,
O, let my books be then the eloquence
Who plead for love and look for recompense
To hear with eyes belongs to love's fine wit.
And perspective it is the painter's art.
For through the painter must you see his skill,
To find where your true image pictured lies;
That hath his windows glazed with thine eyes.
Mine eyes have drawn thy shape, and thine for me
Delights to peep, to gaze therein on thee;
Yet eyes this cunning want to grace their art;
They draw but what they see, know not the heart.
Whilst I, whom fortune of such triumph bars,
But as the marigold at the sun's eye,
And in themselves their pride lies buried,
For at a frown they in their glory die.
Then happy I, that love and am beloved
Where I may not remove nor be removed.
Thy merit hath my duty strongly knit,
Duty so great, which wit so poor as mine
May make seem bare, in wanting words to show it,
But that I hope some good conceit of thine
Till whatsoever star that guides my moving
Points on me graciously with fair aspect
Then may I dare to boast how I do love thee;
Weary with toil, I haste me to my bed,
The dear repose for limbs with travel tired;
But then begins a journey in my head,
For then my thoughts, from far where I abide,
Intend a zealous pilgrimage to thee,
And keep my drooping eyelids open wide,
Looking on darkness which the blind do see
Which, like a jewel hung in ghastly night,
For thee and for myself no quiet find.
How can I then return in happy plight,
When day's oppression is not eased by night,
Do in consent shake hands to torture me;
The one by toil, the other to complain
How far I toil, still farther off from thee.
I tell the day, to please them thou art bright
But day doth daily draw my sorrows longer
When, in disgrace with fortune and men's eyes,
And look upon myself and curse my fate,
Wishing me like to one more rich in hope,
Desiring this man's art and that man's scope,
With what I most enjoy contented least;
Like to the lark at break of day arising
From sullen earth, sings hymns at heaven's gate;
That then I scorn to change my state with kings.
When to the sessions of sweet silent thought
I summon up remembrance of things past,
I sigh the lack of many a thing I sought,
Then can I drown an eye, unused to flow,
Then can I grieve at grievances foregone,
Which I new pay as if not paid before.
But if the while I think on thee, dear friend,
All losses are restored and sorrows end.
Thy bosom is endeared with all hearts,
Which I by lacking have supposed dead,
And there reigns love and all love's loving parts,
And all those friends which I thought buried.
How many a holy and obsequious tear
As interest of the dead, which now appear
Thou art the grave where buried love doth live,
Hung with the trophies of my lovers gone,
Who all their parts of me to thee did give;
Their images I loved I view in thee,
And thou, all they, hast all the all of me.
These poor rude lines of thy deceased lover,
Compare them with the bettering of the time,
Reserve them for my love, not for their rhyme,
Exceeded by the height of happier men.
Had my friend's Muse grown with this growing age,
But since he died and poets better prove,
Full many a glorious morning have I seen
Kissing with golden face the meadows green,
Gilding pale streams with heavenly alchemy;
With ugly rack on his celestial face,
And from the forlorn world his visage hide,
With all triumphant splendor on my brow;
And make me travel forth without my cloak,
Tis not enough that through the cloud thou break,
For no man well of such a salve can speak
And they are rich and ransom all ill deeds.
Roses have thorns, and silver fountains mud;
Clouds and eclipses stain both moon and sun,
And loathsome canker lives in sweetest bud.
All men make faults, and even I in this,
Authorizing thy trespass with compare,
Excusing thy sins more than thy sins are;
Such civil war is in my love and hate
Let me confess that we two must be twain,
So shall those blots that do with me remain
Without thy help by me be borne alone.
In our two loves there is but one respect,
Which though it alter not love's sole effect,
Yet doth it steal sweet hours from love's delight.
I may not evermore acknowledge thee,
But do not so; I love thee in such sort
As, thou being mine, mine is thy good report.
As a decrepit father takes delight
To see his active child do deeds of youth,
So I, made lame by fortune's dearest spite,
Take all my comfort of thy worth and truth.
For whether beauty, birth, or wealth, or wit,
Or any of these all, or all, or more,
Entitled in thy parts do crowned sit,
So then I am not lame, poor, nor despised,
Whilst that this shadow doth such substance give
That I in thy abundance am sufficed
And by a part of all thy glory live.
How can my Muse want subject to invent,
Thine own sweet argument, too excellent
Worthy perusal stand against thy sight;
For who's so dumb that cannot write to thee,
Be thou the tenth Muse, ten times more in worth
And he that calls on thee, let him bring forth
Eternal numbers to outlive long date.
If my slight Muse do please these curious days,
The pain be mine, but thine shall be the praise.
O, how thy worth with manners may I sing,
Even for this let us divided live,
And our dear love lose name of single one,
That by this separation I may give
Were it not thy sour leisure gave sweet leave
To entertain the time with thoughts of love,
Which time and thoughts so sweetly doth deceive,
Take all my loves, my love, yea, take them all;
I do forgive thy robbery, gentle thief,
Although thou steal thee all my poverty;
And yet, love knows, it is a greater grief
Lascivious grace, in whom all ill well shows,
Those petty wrongs that liberty commits,
When I am sometime absent from thy heart,
Thy beauty and thy years full well befits,
For still temptation follows where thou art.
Gentle thou art and therefore to be won,
And when a woman woos, what woman's son
And chide try beauty and thy straying youth,
Who lead thee in their riot even there
Where thou art forced to break a twofold truth,
Hers by thy beauty tempting her to thee,
Thine, by thy beauty being false to me.
That thou hast her, it is not all my grief,
And yet it may be said I loved her dearly;
That she hath thee, is of my wailing chief,
A loss in love that touches me more nearly.
And for my sake even so doth she abuse me,
Suffering my friend for my sake to approve her.
If I lose thee, my loss is my love's gain,
And losing her, my friend hath found that loss;
Both find each other, and I lose both twain,
But here's the joy; my friend and I are one;
When most I wink, then do mine eyes best see,
But when I sleep, in dreams they look on thee,
And darkly bright are bright in dark directed.
Then thou, whose shadow shadows doth make bright,
To the clear day with thy much clearer light,
How would, I say, mine eyes be blessed made
By looking on thee in the living day,
When in dead night thy fair imperfect shade
All days are nights to see till I see thee,
And nights bright days when dreams do show thee me.
If the dull substance of my flesh were thought,
Injurious distance should not stop my way;
For then despite of space I would be brought,
From limits far remote where thou dost stay.
No matter then although my foot did stand
Upon the farthest earth removed from thee;
For nimble thought can jump both sea and land
As soon as think the place where he would be.
To leap large lengths of miles when thou art gone,
But that so much of earth and water wrought
I must attend time's leisure with my moan,
The other two, slight air and purging fire,
Are both with thee, wherever I abide;
The first my thought, the other my desire,
For when these quicker elements are gone
In tender embassy of love to thee,
My life, being made of four, with two alone
Who even but now come back again, assured
This told, I joy; but then no longer glad,
I send them back again and straight grow sad.
Mine eye and heart are at a mortal war
How to divide the conquest of thy sight;
Mine eye my heart thy picture's sight would bar,
My heart mine eye the freedom of that right.
But the defendant doth that plea deny
And says in him thy fair appearance lies.
A quest of thoughts, all tenants to the heart,
And by their verdict is determined
As thus; mine eye's due is thy outward part,
And my heart's right thy inward love of heart.
Or heart in love with sighs himself doth smother,
With my love's picture then my eye doth feast
And to the painted banquet bids my heart;
Another time mine eye is my heart's guest
So, either by thy picture or my love,
And I am still with them and they with thee;
Or, if they sleep, thy picture in my sight
How careful was I, when I took my way,
Each trifle under truest bars to thrust,
That to my use it might unused stay
But thou, to whom my jewels trifles are,
Most worthy of comfort, now my greatest grief,
Thou, best of dearest and mine only care,
Art left the prey of every vulgar thief.
Save where thou art not, though I feel thou art,
Within the gentle closure of my breast,
Against that time, if ever that time come,
When I shall see thee frown on my defects,
When as thy love hath cast his utmost sum,
Against that time when thou shalt strangely pass
And scarcely greet me with that sun thine eye,
When love, converted from the thing it was,
Against that time do I ensconce me here
Within the knowledge of mine own desert,
To leave poor me thou hast the strength of laws,
Since why to love I can allege no cause.
How heavy do I journey on the way,
Doth teach that ease and that repose to say
The beast that bears me, tired with my woe,
The bloody spur cannot provoke him on
That sometimes anger thrusts into his hide;
Which heavily he answers with a groan,
More sharp to me than spurring to his side;
For that same groan doth put this in my mind;
My grief lies onward and my joy behind.
Till I return, of posting is no need.
O, what excuse will my poor beast then find,
Then should I spur, though mounted on the wind;
Then can no horse with my desire keep pace;
But love, for love, thus shall excuse my jade;
Towards thee I'll run, and give him leave to go.
So am I as the rich, whose blessed key
The which he will not every hour survey,
For blunting the fine point of seldom pleasure.
Therefore are feasts so solemn and so rare,
Since, seldom coming, in the long year set,
Like stones of worth they thinly placed are,
So is the time that keeps you as my chest,
Or as the wardrobe which the robe doth hide,
To make some special instant special blest,
Blessed are you, whose worthiness gives scope,
Since every one hath, every one, one shade,
And you, but one, can every shadow lend.
Is poorly imitated after you;
On Helen's cheek all art of beauty set,
The one doth shadow of your beauty show,
The other as your bounty doth appear;
And you in every blessed shape we know.
In all external grace you have some part,
But you like none, none you, for constant heart.
The rose looks fair, but fairer we it deem
As the perfumed tincture of the roses,
Hang on such thorns and play as wantonly
But, for their virtue only is their show,
Die to themselves. Sweet roses do not so;
When that shall fade, my verse distills your truth.
Not marble, nor the gilded monuments
Of princes, shall outlive this powerful rhyme;
But you shall shine more bright in these contents
When wasteful war shall statues overturn,
Nor Mars his sword nor war's quick fire shall burn
The living record of your memory.
Shall you pace forth; your praise shall still find room
Even in the eyes of all posterity
That wear this world out to the ending doom.
So, till the judgment that yourself arise,
You live in this, and dwell in lover's eyes.
Sweet love, renew thy force; be it not said
Thy edge should blunter be than appetite,
Thy hungry eyes even till they wink with fullness,
The spirit of love with a perpetual dullness.
Let this sad interim like the ocean be
Which parts the shore, where two contracted new
Come daily to the banks, that, when they see
Return of love, more blest may be the view;
Else call it winter, which being full of care
Being your slave, what should I do but tend
I have no precious time at all to spend,
Nor services to do, till you require.
Whilst I, my sovereign, watch the clock for you,
Nor think the bitterness of absence sour
When you have bid your servant once adieu;
Nor dare I question with my jealous thought
Where you may be, or your affairs suppose,
Save, where you are how happy you make those.
So true a fool is love that in your will,
Though you do any thing, he thinks no ill.
That god forbid that made me first your slave,
I should in thought control your times of pleasure,
Or at your hand the account of hours to crave,
O, let me suffer, being at your beck,
Without accusing you of injury.
Be where you list, your charter is so strong
That you yourself may privilege your time
To what you will; to you it doth belong
I am to wait, though waiting so be hell;
Not blame your pleasure, be it ill or well.
If there be nothing new, but that which is
Hath been before, how are our brains beguiled,
O, that record could with a backward look,
Even of five hundred courses of the sun,
Show me your image in some antique book,
That I might see what the old world could say
To this composed wonder of your frame;
Whether we are mended, or whether better they,
Or whether revolution be the same.
O, sure I am, the wits of former days
To subjects worse have given admiring praise.
So do our minutes hasten to their end;
Each changing place with that which goes before,
In sequent toil all forwards do contend.
Nativity, once in the main of light,
And Time that gave doth now his gift confound.
Time doth transfix the flourish set on youth
Feeds on the rarities of nature's truth,
And yet to times in hope my verse shall stand,
Praising thy worth, despite his cruel hand.
Is it thy will thy image should keep open
So far from home into my deeds to pry,
To find out shames and idle hours in me,
It is my love that keeps mine eye awake;
Mine own true love that doth my rest defeat,
For thee watch I whilst thou dost wake elsewhere,
From me far off, with others all too near.
And all my soul and all my every part;
And for this sin there is no remedy,
It is so grounded inward in my heart.
No shape so true, no truth of such account;
And for myself mine own worth do define,
As I all other in all worths surmount.
But when my glass shows me myself indeed,
Tis thee, myself, that for myself I praise,
Painting my age with beauty of thy days.
Against my love shall be, as I am now,
Stealing away the treasure of his spring;
For such a time do I now fortify
Against confounding age's cruel knife,
That he shall never cut from memory
His beauty shall in these black lines be seen,
And they shall live, and he in them still green.
When I have seen by Time's fell hand defaced
And brass eternal slave to mortal rage;
When I have seen the hungry ocean gain
Advantage on the kingdom of the shore,
And the firm soil win of the watery main,
Increasing store with loss and loss with store;
When I have seen such interchange of state,
Or state itself confounded to decay;
Ruin hath taught me thus to ruminate,
That Time will come and take my love away.
This thought is as a death, which cannot choose
But weep to have that which it fears to lose.
Since brass, nor stone, nor earth, nor boundless sea,
How with this rage shall beauty hold a plea,
O, how shall summer's honey breath hold out
When rocks impregnable are not so stout,
O, none, unless this miracle have might,
That in black ink my love may still shine bright.
Tired with all these, for restful death I cry,
As, to behold desert a beggar born,
And purest faith unhappily forsworn,
And right perfection wrongfully disgraced,
And strength by limping sway disabled,
Tired with all these, from these would I be gone,
Save that, to die, I leave my love alone.
That sin by him advantage should achieve
Why should false painting imitate his cheek
Why should poor beauty indirectly seek
Why should he live, now Nature bankrupt is,
For she hath no exchequer now but his,
And, proud of many, lives upon his gains.
O, him she stores, to show what wealth she had
In days long since, before these last so bad.
When beauty lived and died as flowers do now,
Before the bastard signs of fair were born,
Or durst inhabit on a living brow;
Before the golden tresses of the dead,
To live a second life on second head;
In him those holy antique hours are seen,
Without all ornament, itself and true,
Making no summer of another's green,
Robbing no old to dress his beauty new;
And him as for a map doth Nature store,
To show false Art what beauty was of yore.
Those parts of thee that the world's eye doth view
Want nothing that the thought of hearts can mend;
All tongues, the voice of souls, give thee that due,
Uttering bare truth, even so as foes commend.
But those same tongues that give thee so thine own
In other accents do this praise confound
By seeing farther than the eye hath shown.
They look into the beauty of thy mind,
And that, in guess, they measure by thy deeds;
The solve is this, that thou dost common grow.
That thou art blamed shall not be thy defect,
The ornament of beauty is suspect,
A crow that flies in heaven's sweetest air.
So thou be good, slander doth but approve
For canker vice the sweetest buds doth love,
Yet this thy praise cannot be so thy praise,
No longer mourn for me when I am dead
Then you shall hear the surly sullen bell
Give warning to the world that I am fled
Nay, if you read this line, remember not
The hand that writ it; for I love you so
That I in your sweet thoughts would be forgot
If thinking on me then should make you woe.
O, if, I say, you look upon this verse
When I perhaps compounded am with clay,
Do not so much as my poor name rehearse.
But let your love even with my life decay,
Lest the wise world should look into your moan
And mock you with me after I am gone.
O, lest the world should task you to recite
What merit lived in me, that you should love
After my death, dear love, forget me quite,
For you in me can nothing worthy prove;
Unless you would devise some virtuous lie,
To do more for me than mine own desert,
And hang more praise upon deceased I
O, lest your true love may seem false in this,
That you for love speak well of me untrue,
My name be buried where my body is,
And live no more to shame nor me nor you.
For I am shamed by that which I bring forth,
And so should you, to love things nothing worth.
When yellow leaves, or none, or few, do hang
Upon those boughs which shake against the cold,
Which by and by black night doth take away,
Death's second self, that seals up all in rest.
That on the ashes of his youth doth lie,
Without all bail shall carry me away,
My life hath in this line some interest,
Which for memorial still with thee shall stay.
The earth can have but earth, which is his due;
So then thou hast but lost the dregs of life,
The prey of worms, my body being dead,
Too base of thee to be remembered.
The worth of that is that which it contains,
And that is this, and this with thee remains.
So are you to my thoughts as food to life,
And for the peace of you I hold such strife
Now counting best to be with you alone,
Sometime all full with feasting on your sight
And by and by clean starved for a look;
Possessing or pursuing no delight,
Save what is had or must from you be took.
Thus do I pine and surfeit day by day,
Why is my verse so barren of new pride,
Why with the time do I not glance aside
Why write I still all one, ever the same,
And keep invention in a noted weed,
That every word doth almost tell my name,
O, know, sweet love, I always write of you,
And you and love are still my argument;
So all my best is dressing old words new,
For as the sun is daily new and old,
So is my love still telling what is told.
Thy glass will show thee how thy beauties wear,
Thy dial how thy precious minutes waste;
The vacant leaves thy mind's imprint will bear,
The wrinkles which thy glass will truly show
Of mouthed graves will give thee memory;
Look, what thy memory can not contain
Commit to these waste blanks, and thou shalt find
To take a new acquaintance of thy mind.
These offices, so oft as thou wilt look,
Shall profit thee and much enrich thy book.
So oft have I invoked thee for my Muse
And found such fair assistance in my verse
As every alien pen hath got my use
Thine eyes that taught the dumb on high to sing
And heavy ignorance aloft to fly
And given grace a double majesty.
Yet be most proud of that which I compile,
In others' works thou dost but mend the style,
And arts with thy sweet graces graced be;
But thou art all my art and dost advance
As high as learning my rude ignorance.
Whilst I alone did call upon thy aid,
My verse alone had all thy gentle grace,
And my sick Muse doth give another place.
I grant, sweet love, thy lovely argument
Deserves the travail of a worthier pen,
Yet what of thee thy poet doth invent
He robs thee of and pays it thee again.
He lends thee virtue and he stole that word
From thy behavior; beauty doth he give
And found it in thy cheek; he can afford
No praise to thee but what in thee doth live.
Then thank him not for that which he doth say,
O, how I faint when I of you do write,
Knowing a better spirit doth use your name,
And in the praise thereof spends all his might,
But since your worth, wide as the ocean is,
The humble as the proudest sail doth bear,
My saucy bark inferior far to his
On your broad main doth wilfully appear.
Then if he thrive and I be cast away,
The worst was this; my love was my decay.
Or I shall live your epitaph to make,
Or you survive when I in earth am rotten;
From hence your memory death cannot take,
Although in me each part will be forgotten.
Your name from hence immortal life shall have,
The earth can yield me but a common grave,
When you entombed in men's eyes shall lie.
Your monument shall be my gentle verse,
And tongues to be your being shall rehearse
Where breath most breathes, even in the mouths of men.
I grant thou wert not married to my Muse
The dedicated words which writers use
Of their fair subject, blessing every book
Thou art as fair in knowledge as in hue,
Finding thy worth a limit past my praise,
And therefore art enforced to seek anew
And do so, love; yet when they have devised
What strained touches rhetoric can lend,
Thou truly fair wert truly sympathized
And their gross painting might be better used
Where cheeks need blood; in thee it is abused.
I never saw that you did painting need
And therefore to your fair no painting set;
I found, or thought I found, you did exceed
The barren tender of a poet's debt;
And therefore have I slept in your report,
That you yourself being extant well might show
How far a modern quill doth come too short,
Speaking of worth, what worth in you doth grow.
This silence for my sin you did impute,
Which shall be most my glory, being dumb;
For I impair not beauty being mute,
When others would give life and bring a tomb.
There lives more life in one of your fair eyes
Than both your poets can in praise devise.
Which should example where your equal grew.
Lean penury within that pen doth dwell
That to his subject lends not some small glory;
But he that writes of you, if he can tell
Let him but copy what in you is writ,
Not making worse what nature made so clear,
And such a counterpart shall fame his wit,
Making his style admired every where.
Being fond on praise, which makes your praises worse.
While comments of your praise, richly compiled,
Reserve their character with golden quill
And precious phrase by all the Muses filed.
I think good thoughts whilst other write good words,
To every hymn that able spirit affords
And to the most of praise add something more;
But that is in my thought, whose love to you,
Then others for the breath of words respect,
Me for my dumb thoughts, speaking in effect.
Was it the proud full sail of his great verse,
Bound for the prize of all too precious you,
Was it his spirit, by spirits taught to write
Giving him aid, my verse astonished.
He, nor that affable familiar ghost
Which nightly gulls him with intelligence
As victors of my silence cannot boast;
The charter of thy worth gives thee releasing;
My bonds in thee are all determinate.
The cause of this fair gift in me is wanting,
So thy great gift, upon misprision growing,
Comes home again, on better judgment making.
Thus have I had thee, as a dream doth flatter,
In sleep a king, but waking no such matter.
When thou shalt be disposed to set me light,
And place my merit in the eye of scorn,
Upon thy side against myself I'll fight,
And prove thee virtuous, though thou art forsworn.
With mine own weakness being best acquainted,
Upon thy part I can set down a story
And I by this will be a gainer too;
For bending all my loving thoughts on thee,
The injuries that to myself I do,
Such is my love, to thee I so belong,
That for thy right myself will bear all wrong.
Against thy reasons making no defence.
To set a form upon desired change,
I will acquaintance strangle and look strange,
Be absent from thy walks, and in my tongue
Thy sweet beloved name no more shall dwell,
Lest I, too much profane, should do it wrong
For thee against myself I'll vow debate,
For I must ne'er love him whom thou dost hate.
Then hate me when thou wilt; if ever, now;
Now, while the world is bent my deeds to cross,
Join with the spite of fortune, make me bow,
Give not a windy night a rainy morrow,
If thou wilt leave me, do not leave me last,
But in the onset come; so shall I taste
At first the very worst of fortune's might,
And other strains of woe, which now seem woe,
Compared with loss of thee will not seem so.
Some glory in their birth, some in their skill,
Some in their hawks and hounds, some in their horse;
But these particulars are not my measure;
All these I better in one general best.
Thy love is better than high birth to me,
Of more delight than hawks or horses be;
All this away and me most wretched make.
For term of life thou art assured mine,
And life no longer than thy love will stay,
For it depends upon that love of thine.
Then need I not to fear the worst of wrongs,
When in the least of them my life hath end.
I see a better state to me belongs
Since that my life on thy revolt doth lie.
O, what a happy title do I find,
So shall I live, supposing thou art true,
Like a deceived husband; so love's face
For there can live no hatred in thine eye,
Therefore in that I cannot know thy change.
Is writ in moods and frowns and wrinkles strange,
But heaven in thy creation did decree
That in thy face sweet love should ever dwell;
Thy looks should nothing thence but sweetness tell.
They that have power to hurt and will do none,
That do not do the thing they most do show,
Who, moving others, are themselves as stone,
Unmoved, cold, and to temptation slow,
They rightly do inherit heaven's graces
And husband nature's riches from expense;
They are the lords and owners of their faces,
Others but stewards of their excellence.
The summer's flower is to the summer sweet,
Though to itself it only live and die,
But if that flower with base infection meet,
Lilies that fester smell far worse than weeds.
How sweet and lovely dost thou make the shame
Which, like a canker in the fragrant rose,
That tongue that tells the story of thy days,
Making lascivious comments on thy sport,
Naming thy name blesses an ill report.
O, what a mansion have those vices got
Which for their habitation chose out thee,
Take heed, dear heart, of this large privilege;
Some say thy grace is youth and gentle sport;
Both grace and faults are loved of more and less;
So are those errors that in thee are seen
How many lambs might the stem wolf betray,
But do not so; I love thee in such sort
As, thou being mine, mine is thy good report.
How like a winter hath my absence been
And yet this time removed was summer's time,
The teeming autumn, big with rich increase,
Bearing the wanton burden of the prime,
For summer and his pleasures wait on thee,
And, thou away, the very birds are mute;
That leaves look pale, dreading the winter's near.
From you have I been absent in the spring,
Hath put a spirit of youth in every thing,
Yet nor the lays of birds nor the sweet smell
Could make me any summer's story tell,
Or from their proud lap pluck them where they grew;
Nor did I wonder at the lily's white,
Nor praise the deep vermilion in the rose;
They were but sweet, but figures of delight,
Drawn after you, you pattern of all those.
Which on thy soft cheek for complexion dwells
In my love's veins thou hast too grossly dyed.
The lily I condemned for thy hand,
One blushing shame, another white despair;
But, for his theft, in pride of all his growth
A vengeful canker eat him up to death.
More flowers I noted, yet I none could see
Return, forgetful Muse, and straight redeem
In gentle numbers time so idly spent;
Sing to the ear that doth thy lays esteem
And gives thy pen both skill and argument.
If Time have any wrinkle graven there;
If any, be a satire to decay,
And make Time's spoils despised every where.
Give my love fame faster than Time wastes life;
O truant Muse, what shall be thy amends
Both truth and beauty on my love depends;
So dost thou too, and therein dignified.
To make him much outlive a gilded tomb,
And to be praised of ages yet to be.
Then do thy office, Muse; I teach thee how
To make him seem long hence as he shows now.
The owner's tongue doth publish every where.
Our love was new and then but in the spring
When I was wont to greet it with my lays,
Not that the summer is less pleasant now
Than when her mournful hymns did hush the night,
And sweets grown common lose their dear delight.
Therefore like her I sometime hold my tongue,
Because I would not dull you with my song.
That having such a scope to show her pride,
The argument all bare is of more worth
Look in your glass, and there appears a face
Dulling my lines and doing me disgrace.
Were it not sinful then, striving to mend,
For to no other pass my verses tend
Than of your graces and your gifts to tell;
And more, much more, than in my verse can sit
Your own glass shows you when you look in it.
To me, fair friend, you never can be old,
For as you were when first your eye I eyed,
Such seems your beauty still. Three winters cold
In process of the seasons have I seen,
Since first I saw you fresh, which yet are green.
Steal from his figure and no pace perceived;
Nor my beloved as an idol show,
Since all alike my songs and praises be
To one, of one, still such, and ever so.
Still constant in a wondrous excellence;
Therefore my verse to constancy confined,
One thing expressing, leaves out difference.
And in this change is my invention spent,
Three themes in one, which wondrous scope affords.
Which three till now never kept seat in one.
When in the chronicle of wasted time
And beauty making beautiful old rhyme
In praise of ladies dead and lovely knights,
Of hand, of foot, of lip, of eye, of brow,
Even such a beauty as you master now.
So all their praises are but prophecies
For we, which now behold these present days,
Had eyes to wonder, but lack tongues to praise.
Not mine own fears, nor the prophetic soul
Of the wide world dreaming on things to come,
Can yet the lease of my true love control,
Supposed as forfeit to a confined doom.
The mortal moon hath her eclipse endured
And the sad augurs mock their own presage;
And peace proclaims olives of endless age.
Now with the drops of this most balmy time
My love looks fresh, and death to me subscribes,
Since, spite of him, I'll live in this poor rhyme,
And thou in this shalt find thy monument,
What's in the brain that ink may character
What's new to speak, what new to register,
Nothing, sweet boy; but yet, like prayers divine,
Counting no old thing old, thou mine, I thine,
So that eternal love in love's fresh case
Weighs not the dust and injury of age,
Nor gives to necessary wrinkles place,
But makes antiquity for aye his page,
Finding the first conceit of love there bred
Where time and outward form would show it dead.
O, never say that I was false of heart,
As easy might I from myself depart
Like him that travels I return again,
Just to the time, not with the time exchanged,
So that myself bring water for my stain.
All frailties that besiege all kinds of blood,
To leave for nothing all thy sum of good;
For nothing this wide universe I call,
Save thou, my rose; in it thou art my all.
And made myself a motley to the view,
Gored mine own thoughts, sold cheap what is most dear,
And worse essays proved thee my best of love.
Mine appetite I never more will grind
On newer proof, to try an older friend,
A god in love, to whom I am confined.
Then give me welcome, next my heaven the best,
Even to thy pure and most most loving breast.
O, for my sake do you with Fortune chide,
The guilty goddess of my harmful deeds,
That did not better for my life provide
Than public means which public manners breeds.
Thence comes it that my name receives a brand,
And almost thence my nature is subdued
Whilst, like a willing patient, I will drink
No bitterness that I will bitter think,
Nor double penance, to correct correction.
Pity me then, dear friend, and I assure ye
Even that your pity is enough to cure me.
Your love and pity doth the impression fill
For what care I who calls me well or ill,
You are my all the world, and I must strive
None else to me, nor I to none alive,
You are so strongly in my purpose bred
Since I left you, mine eye is in my mind;
And that which governs me to go about
Doth part his function and is partly blind,
For it no form delivers to the heart
Of his quick objects hath the mind no part,
For if it see the rudest or gentlest sight,
The mountain or the sea, the day or night,
Incapable of more, replete with you,
My most true mind thus makes mine eye untrue.
And that your love taught it this alchemy,
To make of monsters and things indigest
Creating every bad a perfect best,
That mine eye loves it and doth first begin.
Those lines that I before have writ do lie,
Yet then my judgment knew no reason why
My most full flame should afterwards burn clearer.
Divert strong minds to the course of altering things;
Alas, why, fearing of time's tyranny,
Love is a babe; then might I not say so,
Let me not to the marriage of true minds
Admit impediments. Love is not love
Which alters when it alteration finds,
It is the star to every wandering bark,
Whose worth's unknown, although his height be taken.
Love's not Time's fool, though rosy lips and cheeks
Love alters not with his brief hours and weeks,
But bears it out even to the edge of doom.
If this be error and upon me proved,
I never writ, nor no man ever loved.
Wherein I should your great deserts repay,
Forgot upon your dearest love to call,
That I have frequent been with unknown minds
That I have hoisted sail to all the winds
Which should transport me farthest from your sight.
And on just proof surmise accumulate;
Bring me within the level of your frown,
Since my appeal says I did strive to prove
The constancy and virtue of your love.
Like as, to make our appetites more keen,
With eager compounds we our palate urge,
As, to prevent our maladies unseen,
We sicken to shun sickness when we purge,
To bitter sauces did I frame my feeding
Thus policy in love, to anticipate
The ills that were not, grew to faults assured
And brought to medicine a healthful state
But thence I learn, and find the lesson true,
Drugs poison him that so fell sick of you.
What potions have I drunk of Siren tears,
Applying fears to hopes and hopes to fears,
What wretched errors hath my heart committed,
How have mine eyes out of their spheres been fitted
That better is by evil still made better;
Grows fairer than at first, more strong, far greater.
So I return rebuked to my content
And gain by ill thrice more than I have spent.
That you were once unkind befriends me now,
And for that sorrow which I then did feel
Needs must I under my transgression bow,
And I, a tyrant, have no leisure taken
To weigh how once I suffered in your crime.
My deepest sense, how hard true sorrow hits,
But that your trespass now becomes a fee;
Mine ransoms yours, and yours must ransom me.
When not to be receives reproach of being,
For why should others false adulterate eyes
No, I am that I am, and they that level
I may be straight, though they themselves be bevel;
By their rank thoughts my deeds must not be shown;
Unless this general evil they maintain,
All men are bad, and in their badness reign.
Thy gift, thy tables, are within my brain
Which shall above that idle rank remain
Beyond all date, even to eternity;
Or at the least, so long as brain and heart
Have faculty by nature to subsist;
Till each to razed oblivion yield his part
That poor retention could not so much hold,
Nor need I tallies thy dear love to score;
Therefore to give them from me was I bold,
To keep an adjunct to remember thee
Thy pyramids built up with newer might
To me are nothing novel, nothing strange;
They are but dressings of a former sight.
Our dates are brief, and therefore we admire
What thou dost foist upon us that is old,
And rather make them born to our desire
Than think that we before have heard them told.
Thy registers and thee I both defy,
Not wondering at the present nor the past,
For thy records and what we see doth lie,
Made more or less by thy continual haste.
This I do vow and this shall ever be;
If my dear love were but the child of state,
As subject to Time's love or to Time's hate,
It suffers not in smiling pomp, nor falls
It fears not policy, that heretic,
But all alone stands hugely politic,
That it nor grows with heat nor drowns with showers.
To this I witness call the fools of time,
Which die for goodness, who have lived for crime.
Or laid great bases for eternity,
Lose all, and more, by paying too much rent,
No, let me be obsequious in thy heart,
But mutual render, only me for thee.
O thou, my lovely boy, who in thy power
Dost hold Time's fickle glass, his sickle, hour;
If Nature, sovereign mistress over wrack,
She keeps thee to this purpose, that her skill
May time disgrace and wretched minutes kill.
In the old age black was not counted fair,
For since each hand hath put on nature's power,
Sweet beauty hath no name, no holy bower,
Her eyes so suited, and they mourners seem
At such who, not born fair, no beauty lack,
Yet so they mourn, becoming of their woe,
That every tongue says beauty should look so.
Upon that blessed wood whose motion sounds
The wiry concord that mine ear confounds,
Do I envy those jacks that nimble leap
To kiss the tender inward of thy hand,
Whilst my poor lips, which should that harvest reap,
To be so tickled, they would change their state
And situation with those dancing chips,
Making dead wood more blest than living lips.
Since saucy jacks so happy are in this,
Give them thy fingers, me thy lips to kiss.
The expense of spirit in a waste of shame
Is lust in action; and till action, lust
Is perjured, murderous, bloody, full of blame,
Savage, extreme, rude, cruel, not to trust,
Past reason hunted, and no sooner had
On purpose laid to make the taker mad;
Mad in pursuit and in possession so;
Had, having, and in quest to have, extreme;
A bliss in proof, and proved, a very woe;
Before, a joy proposed; behind, a dream.
All this the world well knows; yet none knows well
To shun the heaven that leads men to this hell.
Coral is far more red than her lips' red;
If snow be white, why then her breasts are dun;
If hairs be wires, black wires grow on her head.
But no such roses see I in her cheeks;
And in some perfumes is there more delight
Than in the breath that from my mistress reeks.
I love to hear her speak, yet well I know
That music hath a far more pleasing sound;
I grant I never saw a goddess go;
And yet, by heaven, I think my love as rare
As any she belied with false compare.
As those whose beauties proudly make them cruel;
Thou art the fairest and most precious jewel.
Yet, in good faith, some say that thee behold
To say they err I dare not be so bold,
Although I swear it to myself alone.
And, to be sure that is not false I swear,
A thousand groans, but thinking on thy face,
One on another's neck, do witness bear
In nothing art thou black save in thy deeds,
And thence this slander, as I think, proceeds.
Thine eyes I love, and they, as pitying me,
Knowing thy heart torments me with disdain,
Have put on black and loving mourners be,
Looking with pretty ruth upon my pain.
And truly not the morning sun of heaven
Better becomes the grey cheeks of the east,
Nor that full star that ushers in the even
Doth half that glory to the sober west,
To mourn for me, since mourning doth thee grace,
And suit thy pity like in every part.
Then will I swear beauty herself is black
And all they foul that thy complexion lack.
Me from myself thy cruel eye hath taken,
Of him, myself, and thee, I am forsaken;
But then my friend's heart let my poor heart bail;
And yet thou wilt; for I, being pent in thee,
Perforce am thine, and all that is in me.
And I myself am mortgaged to thy will,
Myself I'll forfeit, so that other mine
But thou wilt not, nor he will not be free,
Under that bond that him as fast doth bind.
The statute of thy beauty thou wilt take,
And sue a friend came debtor for my sake;
So him I lose through my unkind abuse.
He pays the whole, and yet am I not free.
More than enough am I that vex thee still,
To thy sweet will making addition thus.
Wilt thou, whose will is large and spacious,
Shall will in others seem right gracious,
The sea all water, yet receives rain still
And will, thy soul knows, is admitted there;
Ay, fill it full with wills, and my will one.
In things of great receipt with ease we prove
Then in the number let me pass untold,
Though in thy stores' account I one must be;
For nothing hold me, so it please thee hold
Make but my name thy love, and love that still,
Thou blind fool, Love, what dost thou to mine eyes,
They know what beauty is, see where it lies,
Yet what the best is take the worst to be.
Why of eyes' falsehood hast thou forged hooks,
Why should my heart think that a several plot
Or mine eyes seeing this, say this is not,
In things right true my heart and eyes have erred,
When my love swears that she is made of truth
I do believe her, though I know she lies,
Thus vainly thinking that she thinks me young,
Although she knows my days are past the best,
O, love's best habit is in seeming trust,
Therefore I lie with her and she with me,
O, call not me to justify the wrong
Wound me not with thine eye but with thy tongue;
Use power with power and slay me not by art.
Her pretty looks have been mine enemies,
And therefore from my face she turns my foes,
Yet do not so; but since I am near slain,
Kill me outright with looks and rid my pain.
Be wise as thou art cruel; do not press
Lest sorrow lend me words and words express
If I might teach thee wit, better it were,
Though not to love, yet, love, to tell me so;
As testy sick men, when their deaths be near,
No news but health from their physicians know;
For if I should despair, I should grow mad,
That I may not be so, nor thou belied,
Bear thine eyes straight, though thy proud heart go wide.
In faith, I do not love thee with mine eyes,
For they in thee a thousand errors note;
Who in despite of view is pleased to dote;
Nor tender feeling, to base touches prone,
Nor taste, nor smell, desire to be invited
But my five wits nor my five senses can
Dissuade one foolish heart from serving thee,
Only my plague thus far I count my gain,
That she that makes me sin awards me pain.
Love is my sin and thy dear virtue hate,
O, but with mine compare thou thine own state,
Or, if it do, not from those lips of thine,
Root pity in thy heart, that when it grows
Thy pity may deserve to pitied be.
If thou dost seek to have what thou dost hide,
Sets down her babe and makes an swift dispatch
In pursuit of the thing she would have stay,
Whilst her neglected child holds her in chase,
Cries to catch her whose busy care is bent
To follow that which flies before her face,
Whilst I thy babe chase thee afar behind;
But if thou catch thy hope, turn back to me,
If thou turn back, and my loud crying still.
Two loves I have of comfort and despair,
The better angel is a man right fair,
To win me soon to hell, my female evil
And would corrupt my saint to be a devil,
Wooing his purity with her foul pride.
Suspect I may, but not directly tell;
But being both from me, both to each friend,
Yet this shall I ne'er know, but live in doubt,
Till my bad angel fire my good one out.
Those lips that Love's own hand did make
But when she saw my woeful state,
Straight in her heart did mercy come,
Chiding that tongue that ever sweet
Was used in giving gentle doom,
Doth follow night, who like a fiend
From heaven to hell is flown away;
Poor soul, the centre of my sinful earth,
these rebel powers that thee array;
Why dost thou pine within and suffer dearth,
Why so large cost, having so short a lease,
And let that pine to aggravate thy store;
Buy terms divine in selling hours of dross;
So shalt thou feed on Death, that feeds on men,
And Death once dead, there's no more dying then.
My love is as a fever, longing still
Feeding on that which doth preserve the ill,
The uncertain sickly appetite to please.
My reason, the physician to my love,
Angry that his prescriptions are not kept,
Hath left me, and I desperate now approve
Past cure I am, now reason is past care,
For I have sworn thee fair and thought thee bright,
Who art as black as hell, as dark as night.
O me, what eyes hath Love put in my head,
Or, if they have, where is my judgment fled,
If it be not, then love doth well denote
No marvel then, though I mistake my view;
The sun itself sees not till heaven clears.
Do I not think on thee, when I forgot
What merit do I in myself respect,
That is so proud thy service to despise,
When all my best doth worship thy defect,
But, love, hate on, for now I know thy mind;
O, from what power hast thou this powerful might
To make me give the lie to my true sight,
Whence hast thou this becoming of things ill,
That in the very refuse of thy deeds
Who taught thee how to make me love thee more
O, though I love what others do abhor,
More worthy I to be beloved of thee.
Love is too young to know what conscience is;
Then, gentle cheater, urge not my amiss,
For, thou betraying me, I do betray
My soul doth tell my body that he may
Triumph in love; flesh stays no father reason;
But, rising at thy name, doth point out thee
As his triumphant prize. Proud of this pride,
He is contented thy poor drudge to be,
To stand in thy affairs, fall by thy side.
No want of conscience hold it that I call
But thou art twice forsworn, to me love swearing,
In vowing new hate after new love bearing.
For all my vows are oaths but to misuse thee
And all my honest faith in thee is lost,
For I have sworn deep oaths of thy deep kindness,
Oaths of thy love, thy truth, thy constancy,
And, to enlighten thee, gave eyes to blindness,
Or made them swear against the thing they see;
For I have sworn thee fair; more perjured I,
And grew a seething bath, which yet men prove
Against strange maladies a sovereign cure.
The boy for trial needs would touch my breast;
Came tripping by; but in her maiden hand
And so the general of hot desire
Which from Love's fire took heat perpetual,
Growing a bath and healthful remedy
Came there for cure, and this by that I prove,
Love's fire heats water, water cools not love.
